THE PROPERTY MANAGER 

    The role of the property manager is complex, requiring the manager to wear many hats. It is not unusual for a property manager to be a market analyst, salesperson, accountant, advertising specialist, and maintenance person—all in the same day. In addition, the property manager frequently interacts with people in various professions, including lawyers, environmental engineers, and accountants. The three principal responsibilities of the property manager are to

        achieve the objectives of the property owners,
        generate income for the owners, and
        preserve and/or increase the value of the investment property.

    The property manager carries out the goals of the property owners. In the process, the property manager is responsible for maintaining the owner's investment and making sure the property earns income. These goals can be accomplished in several ways. The physical property must be maintained in good condition. Suitable tenants must be found, rent must be collected, and employees must be hired and supervised. The property manager is responsible for budgeting and controlling expenses, keeping proper accounts, and making periodic reports to the owner. In all of these activities, the manager's primary goal is to operate and maintain the physical property in such a way as to preserve and enhance the owner's capital investment.

    Some property managers work for property management companies. These firms manage properties for a number of owners under management agreements. A property manager in a general agency relationship with the property owner could be an independent contractor with great authority and discretion in management decisions. A property manager or an owner may employ building managers to supervise the daily operations of a building. In some cases, these individuals might be residents of the building.

        In Practice

            In most states, licensed real estate professionals are permitted to manage properties for others. Some states have separate property management licenses. When directly employed by the owner, nonlicensed individuals are permitted by some states to manage properties. While some states require licensing in order to manage condominium or cooperative homeowners associations, others do not. Some states require an on-site manager for residential income-producing properties having more than a certain number of units; for example, California requires a manager on-site for residential properties of 16 or more units.

    Securing management business

        Possible clients of a property management business include

            corporate owners,
            apartment buildings,
            owners of small rental residential properties,
            homeowners associations,
            investment syndicates,
            trusts, and
            owners of office buildings.

        A good reputation is often the manager's best advertising. A manager who consistently demonstrates the ability to increase property income over previous levels, while meeting legal requirements and enhancing the property's attractiveness to tenants, should have little difficulty finding new business.

        Before contracting to manage any property, the professional property manager should be certain that the building owner has realistic income expectations. Necessary maintenance, unexpected repairs, and effective marketing all take time and money. In addition, most states have landlord-tenant laws that require the landlord-owner to keep the property repaired and make sure it complies with building codes. Through the agency relationship with the owner, the property manager becomes responsible for repairs and the building's condition.

    New opportunities

        Specialization has opened a range of new opportunities. Well-trained specialists are needed to manage shopping centers, commercial buildings, and industrial parks, in addition to the more visible management of residential properties. The following are just a few of the specialties that have an ongoing need for competent managers.

    Community association management

        The prevalence of homeowners and condominium associations combined with complex planning and development codes have placed new demands on property managers. Working as part of a team, property managers assist in providing a comprehensive array of services to volunteer boards. Many states now require at least a real estate license or an association management license for those who specialize in managing associations.

    Housing for seniors

        Opportunities abound in managing housing for those age 55 and older, including federally assisted housing programs. In addition to marketing, managers of senior housing are often responsible for the operation of the facility, as well as housekeeping, meal service, social event planning, and medical emergency planning. When subsidized housing is involved, the property manager needs to be familiar with state and federal rules pertaining to eligibility requirements and income verification.

    Manufactured homes

        Homes built in factories meeting HUD specifications are called manufactured homes or HUD-code homes. These homes may be placed on individually owned land, but more than a third are sited in communities. A tenant may rent only the "pad," the land on which the home is sited, or the home itself. Many communities, especially those in the sun belt states, are geared toward seniors; managers at these communities must be effective at building community spirit.

    Resort housing

        Managing second-home and resort rentals presents specific challenges. A resort manager must be able to care for and maintain often-vacant properties and be able to attract and manage short-term tenants. Many such properties are located in high-risk areas for natural disasters such as hurricanes, so the manager must be able to prepare for an emergency as well as to work with insurance adjusters.

    Concierge services

        A new area for property managers to specialize in is the training and managing of concierge staff for office buildings and other settings. Concierge staff are responsible for anything from arranging for taxi rides to assisting with internet-enabled equipment for a conference.

    Asset management

        An asset manager monitors a portfolio of properties similar to a securities portfolio by analyzing the performance of the properties and making recommendations to the owners of the properties. Real property asset management helps clients decide what type of real estate to invest in—commercial, residential, industrial, or agricultural—and which property is best to purchase, the best financial sources for a real estate purchase, and when to dispose of property.

    Corporate property manager

        Hiring a corporate property manager allows a corporation to invest in real estate and increase its capital, even if the corporation is not necessarily knowledgeable about property management. Typically, the corporate property manager is an employee of the corporation and not an independent contractor.

    Leasing agent

        A leasing agent is usually an independent contractor working on a commission basis. Leasing agents are usually in high demand because of their skill in securing lessees.

    Professional associations

        Most metropolitan areas have local associations of building and property owners and managers that are affiliates of regional and national associations. Many of these professional organizations provide information and contacts for all aspects of property management. Many also provide well-respected designations that help open doors for the property manager who is willing to fulfill the educational and/or experience requirements that a designation requires. The better-known associations include the following:

            Building Owners and Managers Association International (BOMA)—commercial real estate, www.boma.org
            Building Owners and Managers Institute International (BOMI)—education programs for commercial property and facility management industries, www.bomi.org
            Community Associations Institute (CAI)—homeowners associations, condominiums, and other planned communities, www.caionline.org
            Institute of Real Estate Management (IREM)—multifamily and commercial real estate designation, www.irem.org
            International Council of Shopping Centers (ICSC)—shopping centers worldwide, www.icsc.org
            National Apartment Association (NAA)—multifamily housing industry, www.naahq.org
            National Association of Home Builders (NAHB)—all aspects of home building, www.nahb.org
            National Association of Residential Property Managers (NARPM)—single-family and small residential properties, www.narpm.org

    THE MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT 

        The first step in taking over the management of any property is to enter into a management agreement, a contract creating a general agency relationship between the owner and the property manager. The management agreement defines the duties and responsibilities of each party; it is a guide used in operating the property, as well as a reference in case of any future disputes.

    The property manager's role

        The property manager is typically considered a general agent. As an agent, the property manager is charged with the fiduciary responsibilities of care, obedience, accounting, loyalty, confidentiality, and disclosure. Property managers are usually empowered to make many more decisions on behalf of the owner than a real estate professional can make in the real estate professional's representation of a seller or a buyer. After entering into an agreement with a property owner, a manager handles the property the same way the owner would. In all activities, the manager's first responsibility is to realize the highest return on the property in a manner consistent with the owner's instructions and applicable law. As in any other contract in which the duties and responsibilities of the parties are specified, the management agreement should be in writing, and it should include the following points:

            Description of the property.
            Time period the agreement covers and specific provisions for termination.
            Definition of the manager's responsibilities. All the manager's duties should be specifically stated in the contract. Any limitations or restrictions on what the manager may do should be clearly stated.
            Statement of the owner's purpose and responsibilities. The owner should clearly state what the manager is to accomplish. One owner may want to maximize net income, while another may want to increase the capital value of the investment. What the manager does depends on the owner's long-term goals for the property. The agreement also should list the owner's responsibilities for management expenses, such as payroll, advertising, insurance, and management fees.
            Extent of the manager's authority. This provision should state what authority the manager is to have in matters such as hiring, firing, and supervising employees; fixing rental rates for space; and making expenditures and authorizing repairs. Repairs that exceed a certain expense limit may require the owner's written approval.
            Reporting. The frequency and detail of the manager's periodic reports on operations and financial position should be agreed on. These reports serve as a means for the owner to monitor the manager's work. They also form a basis for both the owner and the manager to spot trends that are important in shaping management policy. The state real estate commission usually will have regulations concerning reporting.
            Compensation. The management fee or other form of compensation may be based on a percentage of gross or net income, a fixed fee, or some combination of these and other factors. The compensation provision of the agreement should state the base fee, as well as any leasing fees, supervision fees, or other commissions or compensations.
            Allocation of costs. The agreement should state which of the property manager's expenses—such as office rent, office help, telephone, advertising, and association fees—will be paid by the manager. Other costs will be paid by the owner.
            Liability. The agreement should require that the manager be included as an additional insured on the property liability policy.
            Antitrust provisions. Management fees are subject to the same antitrust considerations as sales commissions. They cannot be standardized in the marketplace, because standardization would be considered price-fixing. The fee must be negotiated between the agent and the principal. In addition, the property manager may be entitled to a commission on new rentals and renewed leases.
            Equal opportunity statement. Residential property management agreements should include a statement that the property will be shown, rented, and otherwise made available to all persons, regardless of race, color, religion, sex, disability, national origin, or family status, and to any class of person protected by local, state or federal law.

        Math Concepts

            Rental Commissions

            Residential property managers often earn commissions when they find tenants for a property. Rental commissions are usually based on the annual rent from a property. The commission on a year's lease may be one month's rent, or may be a percentage of the projected lease payments. For example, if an apartment unit rents for $3,200 per month, the lease is for one year, and the commission payable is 8%, the commission is calculated as follows:

            $3,200 per month × 12 months = $38,400

            $38,400 × 0.08 = $3,072

THE PROPERTY MANAGER"S RESPONSIBILITIES 

    Property management begins with a management plan prepared by the property manager. A management plan outlines the details of the owner's objectives with the property, as well as what the property manager expects to accomplish and how, including all financial objectives.

    The management plan

        In preparing a management plan, a property manager analyzes three factors: the owner's objectives, the regional and neighborhood market, and the specific property. Occupancy, absorption rates, and new starts are critical indicators. The plan also includes a budgetary section on sources of revenue and anticipated expenses. While the management plan is a document for the present, it is forward-looking in determining the feasibility of a property owner's long-term goals for a specific property.

    Financial reports

        One of the primary responsibilities of a property manager is maintaining financial reports, including an operating budget, cash flow report, profit and loss statement, and budget comparison statement. While there are no standard formats for these reports, they have some similarity, and it is important for the property manager to adapt a report to meet an owner's needs. The reports are sent to the property owner at the agreed-upon intervals, by mail or email, but the property manager should meet the client at least once a year to go over the property's financial status in detail. Not only is this helpful to the owner's understanding of the property's performance, it is an excellent way for the property manager to demonstrate the levels of service and expertise that are being provided to the client.

    Operating budget

        The projection of income and expense for the operation of a property over a one-year period is called an operating budget. This budget, developed before attempting to rent property, is based on anticipated revenues and expenses and provides the owner the amount of expected profit. The property uses the operating budget as a guide for the property's financial performance in the present and future.

        nce a property manager has managed a property for a length of time, an operating budget may be developed based on the results of the profit and loss statement in comparison to the original budget (actual versus projected). After making the comparison, a new operating budget is prepared for a new time period in the future.

    Cash flow report

        A cash flow report is a monthly statement that details the financial status of the property. Sources of income and expenses are noted, as well as net operating income and net cash flow. The cash flow report is the most important financial report because it provides a picture of the current financial status of a property.

    Income

        Income includes gross rentals collected, delinquent rental payments, utilities, vending machine proceeds, contracts, late fees, and storage charges. In some properties, there is space that is not income producing, such as the property manager's office. The rental value of the property that is not producing income is subtracted from the gross rental income to equal the gross collectible, or billable, rental income.

        Any losses from uncollected rental payments or evictions are deducted from total gross income to arrive at net operating income.

    Expenses

        A property will incur both fixed and variable expenses. Fixed expenses are those that remain fairly predictable, even though they may increase or decrease somewhat, such as employee wages and other administrative expenses, utilities, and other basic operating costs. Variable expenses may be recurring or nonrecurring and can include capital improvements, building repairs, and landscaping.

    Cash flow

        Cash flow is derived as shown below. The entry for "debt service" in the third equation includes any mortgage payments on the property.

            gross rental income + other income – losses incurred = total income

            total income – operating expenses = net operating income

            net operating income – debt service – reserves = cash flow

    Profit and loss statement

        A profit and loss statement is a financial picture of revenues and expenses used to determine whether a business has made money or suffered a loss. It may be prepared monthly, quarterly, semiannually, or annually. The statement is created from the monthly cash flow reports and does not include itemized information. A formula for a profit and loss statement is as follows:

            gross receipts – operating expenses – total mortgage payment + mortgage loan principal = net profit

    Budget comparison statement

        The budget comparison statement compares actual results with the original budget, often giving either percentages or a numerical variance of actual versus projected income and expenses. Budget comparisons are especially helpful in identifying trends in order to help with future budget planning.

    Renting the property

        Effective rental of the property being managed is essential to ensure its long-term financial health. A property manager may use the services of a leasing agent. The real estate professional acting as leasing agent will be concerned solely with renting space and will not be responsible for maintaining and managing the property.

    Setting rental rates

        While some municipalities control rent increases for residential tenants, most communities allow the market to determine the amount of rent that a tenant should pay. Because rental rates are influenced primarily by supply and demand, property managers should conduct a detailed survey of the competitive space available in the neighborhood, emphasizing similar properties. In establishing rental rates, property managers must consider the following:

            The rental income must be sufficient to cover the property's fixed charges and operating expenses.
            The rental income must provide a return on the owner's investment.
            The rental rate should be comparable with prevailing rates in comparable buildings in the area; it may be slightly higher or slightly lower, depending on the desirability of the property.
            The current vacancy rate in the property is a good indicator of how much of a rent increase might be possible. A building with a low vacancy rate is a better candidate for an increase than one with a high vacancy rate.

        A rental rate for residential space is usually stated as the monthly rate per unit. Commercial leases—including office, retail, and industrial space rentals—are usually stated according to either annual or monthly rates per square foot.

        An elevated level of vacancy may indicate poor management, a defective or undesirable property, or rental rates that are too high for the market or the property. A high occupancy rate may mean that rental rates are too low. Before adjusting the rental rates, the manager should investigate the rental market to determine whether a rent increase is warranted.

    Marketing

        To ensure that a property generates income, the property manager must attract the most reliable tenants. The marketing strategy must take into consideration the property itself, the supply and demand in the area where the property is located, and the amount of money available for advertising.

    Advertising

        All advertising and promotional activities must comply with federal, state, and local nondiscrimination laws. The content cannot market to members of a protected class, but also must not discriminate on the basis of a prospective tenant's race, color, religion, sex, national origin, familial status, or disability. To ensure that a property generates income, the property manager must attract the best tenants.

        Advertising methods are numerous and include internet sites and social media, newspapers, brochures, radio, television, and direct mail.

    Management activities

        Because property management firms are often known by reputation, it is important for a firm to maintain good public relations. One way to cultivate public relations is through community involvement and charitable giving.

        Firms can also write and issue public service announcements (PSAs) or press releases regarding special projects. These announcements can attract the attention of the media and, ultimately, prospective tenants.

    Marketing and advertising costs

        A cost-benefit analysis helps a property manager assess whether a particular advertising method worked to attract new tenants. Property marketing expenses are usually figured on a cost-per-prospect-per-lease basis. For example, if a three-bedroom apartment rents for $4,500, is typically viewed by 10 prospects before it is leased, and a single newspaper advertisement is the only marketing, an $1,200 newspaper ad would cost $120 per prospect.

        The internet has significantly expanded a property manager's ability to reach consumers. Online apartment vacancy listing sites include www.apartmentfinder.com, www.apartmentguide.com, www.craigslist.org, www.forrent.com, www.realtor.com, www.trulia.com, and www.zillow.com.

    Selecting tenants

        The residential property manager must be sure to comply with all federal, state, and local fair housing laws in selecting tenants. Although fair housing laws do not apply to commercial properties, commercial property managers need to be aware of federal, state, and local antidiscrimination and equal opportunity laws that may govern industrial or retail properties, including the Americans with Disabilities Act.

        The commercial property manager should be sure that the premises are suitable for the tenant in terms of size, location, and amenities, and that the tenant can afford the space. A commercial tenant's business should be compatible not only with the building but also with the businesses of the other tenants. Managers should always ask commercial tenants about the potential for expansion. Because the property may not have enough room for expansion, the manager could soon lose the tenant to a larger space.

            In Practice

                Some commercial leases prohibit the introduction of similar businesses. In any event, introduction of competitors into the same property should be undertaken with care because competitors in the same location will often decrease the activity of both businesses and soon one or the other will seek to move.

                Most states have strict requirements as to how security deposits should be handled by the property manager: how soon they must be deposited, into what kind of account, and when they must be refunded. In general, funds belonging to others, such as security deposits and collected rents, should be placed into a trust or escrow account. Property managers should not use any of these funds personally (conversion) or mix the funds into a personal account (commingling).

    Collecting rents

        A property manager should accept only those tenants who can be expected to meet their financial obligations. The manager should investigate financial references, check with local credit bureaus, and when possible, interview a prospective tenant's former landlord to ensure the tenant is able to meet financial obligations. Financial qualification standards must be applied in a similar fashion to all applicants to avoid even the appearance of a discriminatory practice.

        The terms of rental payment should be spelled out in the lease agreement, including

            time and place of payment,
            provisions and penalties for late payment and returned checks, and
            provisions for cancellation and damages in case of nonpayment.

        The property manager should establish a firm and consistent collection plan. The plan should include a system of notices and records that complies with state and local law.

        Every attempt must be made to collect rent without resorting to legal action. Legal action is costly and time consuming, and does not contribute to good tenant relations. In some cases, however, legal action is unavoidable. In these instances, a property manager must be prepared to initiate and follow through, in cooperation with the property owner's or management firm's attorney, on the necessary legal steps.

    Maintaining good relations with tenants

        The ultimate success of a property manager depends on the ability to maintain good relations with tenants. Dissatisfied tenants are more likely to vacate the property early. A high tenant turnover rate results in greater expenses for advertising and redecorating and less profit for the owner due to uncollected rents. Empty units and storefronts can also damage a property's reputation—and its perceived desirability.

        An effective property manager establishes a good communication system with tenants—and prospective tenants. An internet site that highlights property features and solicits new tenants can also have a section limited to residents that posts activities, maintenance updates, and other news to keep tenants informed and involved. Email notices, printed and electronic newsletters, and posted memoranda, especially when updated on a regular basis, are also useful.

        Above all, maintenance and service requests must be attended to promptly, and all lease terms and building rules must be enforced consistently and fairly. A manager who fails to treat all tenants the same in terms of rent collection and enforcement of lease terms or rules and regulations will create ill will among tenants and might even be violating fair housing laws. A good manager is tactful and decisive, and acts to benefit both owner and occupants.

        The property manager must be able to address residents who do not pay rent on time or who violate building regulations. When one tenant fails to follow the rules, the other tenants often become frustrated and dissatisfied. Careful recordkeeping shows whether rent is remitted promptly and in the proper amount. Records of all lease renewal dates should be kept so that the manager can anticipate a lease expiration and retain a good tenant who might otherwise move when the lease term ends.

    Maintaining the property

        One of the most important functions of a property manager is the supervision of property maintenance. A manager must learn to balance the services provided with their cost—that is, to satisfy tenants' needs while keeping operating expenses within budget.

        To maintain property efficiently, the manager must be able to assess the building's needs and how best to meet those needs. Because staffing and scheduling requirements vary with the type, size, and geographic location of the property, the owner and the manager usually agree in advance on maintenance objectives. In some cases, the best plan may be to operate a low-rent property with minimal expenditures for services and maintenance. Another property may be more lucrative if kept in top condition and operated with all possible tenant services. A well-maintained, high-service property can command premium rental rates.

        A primary maintenance objective is to protect the physical integrity of the property over the long term. For example, preserving the property by repainting the exterior or replacing the heating system helps decrease long-term maintenance costs. Keeping the property in good condition involves the following three types of maintenance:

            Preventive
            Repair or corrective

            Routine

        Preventive maintenance includes regularly scheduled activities such as painting and seasonal servicing of appliances and systems. Preventive maintenance preserves the long-range value and physical integrity of the building. This is both the most critical and the most neglected maintenance responsibility. Failure to perform preventive maintenance invariably leads to greater expense in other areas of maintenance.

        Repair or corrective maintenance involves the actual repairs that keep the building's equipment, utilities, and amenities functioning. Repairing a toilet, fixing a leaky faucet, and replacing a broken air-conditioning unit are acts of corrective maintenance.

        A property manager also must supervise the routine maintenance of the building. Routine maintenance includes such day-to-day duties as performing minor carpentry and plumbing repairs, and providing regularly scheduled upkeep of heating, air-conditioning, and landscaping


            In Practice

                One of the major decisions a property manager faces is whether to contract for maintenance services from an outside firm or to hire on-site employees. The property manager will make the decision on what is most cost-effective for the owner. This decision should be based on a number of factors, including the

                    size of the building,
                    complexity of the tenants' requirements,
                    time and expense involved, and
                    availability of suitable labor.

        A commercial or industrial property manager often is called on to make tenant improvements (or build-outs). These are construction alterations to the interior of the building to meet a tenant's particular space needs. Such alterations range from simply repainting or recarpeting to completely gutting the interior and redesigning the space by erecting new walls, partitions, and electrical systems. Tenant improvements are especially important when renting new buildings. In new construction, the interiors are usually left incomplete so that they can be adapted to the needs of individual tenants. One matter that must be clarified is which improvements will be considered trade fixtures (personal property belonging to the tenant) and which will belong to the owner of the real estate.

        Modernization or renovation of buildings that have become functionally obsolete and thus unsuited to today's building needs is also important. The renovation of a building often enhances its marketability and increases its potential income. At the same time, federal and state regulations regarding lead-based paint, asbestos, and other hazardous substances that may be found in or around a structure can entail expensive remediation efforts.

Environmental concerns

    The environment is an increasingly important property management issue. A variety of environmental issues, from waste disposal to air quality, must be addressed by the property manager. Tenant concerns, as well as federal, state, and local regulations, determine the extent of the manager's environmental responsibilities. Property managers are not expected to be experts in all of the disciplines necessary to operate a property; they are expected to be knowledgeable in many diverse subjects, most of which are technical in nature. Environmental concerns are one such subject.

    Recycling facilities may be required by law, but even if they are not, the manager may want to provide them for tenants, which can benefit the environment, as well as make the property more marketable. Hazardous wastes produced by employees or tenants must be properly disposed of. Even the normally nonhazardous waste of an office building must be controlled to avoid violation of laws requiring segregation and recycling of types of waste. Residential property managers of buildings constructed before 1978 must provide lead-based paint disclosure forms to all new tenants. Environmental audits also identify issues relating to asbestos, radon, and mold.

    Air quality issues are a key concern for those involved in property management and design. Building-related illness (BRI) and sick building syndrome (SBS) are illnesses that are more prevalent today because of energy efficiency standards used in construction that make buildings more airtight with less ventilation. BRI is a clinically diagnosed condition that can be attributed directly to airborne building contaminants. Symptoms include asthma, hypersensitivity, and some allergies. SBS is more typical in an office building, and symptoms include fatigue, nausea, dizziness, headache, and sensitivity to odors. Often, increasing ventilation or replacing interior features, such as carpeting, can solve air quality problems.

FEDERAL LAWS PROHIBITING DISCRIMINATION 
    Federal laws prohibiting discrimination in the provision of housing, accommodations, services, and access to credit affect the property management profession. The Americans with Disabilities Act, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, and the Fair Housing Act all help to ensure that consumer rights are not violated.

    The Americans with Disabilities Act

        The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), www.ada.gov, has had a significant impact on the responsibilities of the property manager, in both building amenities and employment issues.

        ADA Title I provides that any employer of 15 or more employees must adopt nondiscriminatory employment procedures. In addition, an employer must make reasonable accommodations to enable an individual with a disability to perform essential job functions.

        Property managers also must be familiar with ADA Title III, which prohibits discrimination in commercial properties and public accommodations. ADA requires that companies ensure that people with disabilities have full and equal access to facilities and services. (See  Reasonable Modifications to Public Facilities or Services).

            In Practice

                A prospective tenant is visually impaired. The property manager should be prepared to provide a lease agreement that is in large, easy-to-read type or that is printed in Braille, as required.

    Reasonable Modifications to Public Facilities or Services

        To protect owners of existing structures from the massive expense of extensive remodeling, the ADA recommends reasonably achievable accommodations to provide access to the facilities and services. Existing barriers must be removed when this can be accomplished in a readily achievable manner with little difficulty and at reasonable cost. The following are typical examples of readily achievable modifications:

            Ramping or removing an obstacle from an otherwise accessible entrance
            Lowering wall-mounted public telephones
            Adding raised letters and Braille markings on elevator buttons
            Installing auditory signals in elevators
            Reversing the direction in which doors open

        Alternative methods can be used to provide reasonable accommodations if extensive restructuring is impractical or if retrofitting is unduly expensive. For example, installing a cup dispenser at a water fountain that is too high for a person in a wheelchair may be more practical than installing a lower water fountain.

            In Practice

                Federal, state, and local laws may provide additional requirements for accommodating people with disabilities. Real estate professionals should be aware of the full range of laws to ensure that their practices are in compliance.

        New construction and remodeling must meet higher standards of accessibility and usability because it costs less to incorporate accessible features in the design than to retrofit. Though the law intends to provide for people with disabilities, many accessible design features and accommodations benefit everyone. Such universal design can enhance a property's desirability and be a successful marketing concept.

        The property manager typically is responsible for determining whether a building meets ADA accessibility requirements. The property manager also must prepare a plan for retrofitting a building that is not in compliance when removal of existing barriers is readily achievable and can be performed without much difficulty or expense. Some tax advantages may be available to help offset the expense of ADA compliance. ADA experts may be consulted, as well as architectural designers who specialize in accessibility issues.

            In Practice

                The U.S. Department of Justice has ADA specialists available to answer general information questions about compliance issues. The ADA Information Line is 800-514-0301 (TTY: 800-514-0383).

    Equal Credit Opportunity Act

        The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) prohibits a lender from denying a loan based on a person's race, color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age, or receipt of public assistance. The ECOA affects the property manager in several ways. A manager should use the same lease application for every applicant. If a manager requires a credit report from one applicant, the manager should require credit reports from all applicants. The manager should be consistent in evaluating the income and debt of applicants and in determining whether to rent to an applicant. A complete copy of the law can be found at www.fdic.gov/regulations/laws/rules/6500-1200.html.

    Fair Housing Act

        The federal Fair Housing Act and its amendments prohibit discrimination in the sale, rental, or financing of housing based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, familial status, or disability. Property managers need to ensure that their marketing practices do not violate fair housing laws. For example, blockbusting and steering are prohibited. Blockbusting is encouraging people to rent or to sell a property by claiming that the entry of a protected class of people into the neighborhood will have a negative impact on property values. Steering is the channeling of protected class members to certain buildings or neighborhoods. The Department of Justice has information on fair housing issues at www.justice.gov/crt/fair-housing-act-1

            In Practice

                Many fair housing complaints are related to property management issues that could have been avoided by treating all rental applicants with the same courtesy and respect. A fair housing training program can be useful at any stage of a real estate professional's career and is often a requirement for license renewal.

RISK MANAGEMENT 
    Enormous monetary losses can result from unexpected or catastrophic events. As a result, one of the most critical areas of responsibility for a property manager is risk management.

    Risk management techniques

        Risk management involves answering the question, What happens if something goes wrong? The perils of any risk must be evaluated in terms of options. In considering the possibility of a loss, the property manager must decide whether it is better to

            avoid it by removing the source of risk (e.g., a swimming pool may pose an unacceptable risk);
            control it by preparing for an emergency before it happens (by installing sprinklers, fire doors, and security systems);
            transfer it by shifting the risk onto another party (by taking out an insurance policy); or
            retain it by deciding that the chances of the event occurring are too small to justify the expense of any other response (an alternative might be to take out an insurance policy with a large deductible, making the policy less expensive).

    Security of tenants

        Recent court decisions in several states have held owners and their agents responsible for physical harm that was inflicted on tenants by intruders. These decisions have prompted property managers and owners to think about how to protect tenants and secure apartments from intruders. After the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, and subsequent incidents, managers of all types of properties have increased awareness of security issues. A professional security analysis can help identify areas of concern and suggest possible remedies.

        There is also concern caused by wrongdoing or criminal behavior inflicted by tenants on other tenants in a building. Many leases now have a crime-free provision that makes criminal activity, such as drug use or assault, grounds for eviction.

    Types of insurance

        Just as it is for homeowners, insurance is a first line of defense in risk management for other real property owners and managers. Numerous forms of insurance policies are available, covering a wide range of possible events that might result in devastating loss. A single policy may cover risks in one or more categories.

    Tenant's insurance

        The property manager should notify tenants that they must obtain renter's insurance, known as HO-4, in order to protect their personal belongings. The real estate owner can only insure what is owned (i.e., the building); the owner of the building cannot insure the personal property of tenants. Residential tenants need an HO-4 or renter's policy to insure their personal property. Business tenants can obtain their own business or commercial policy.

    Commercial insurance

        An insurance audit should be performed by a competent, reliable insurance agent who is familiar with insurance issues for the type of property involved. The audit will indicate areas in which greater or lesser coverage is recommended and will highlight particular risks. The final decision, however, is made by the property owner.

            Common types of coverage available to income property owners and managers include the following:

                Fire and hazard. Fire insurance policies provide coverage against direct loss or damage to property from a fire on the premises. Standard fire coverage can be extended to include other hazards, such as windstorm, hail, smoke damage, or civil insurrection.
                Flood. Flood insurance is always a separate policy from home, rental, or building insurance policies. A flood insurance policy is available to any property located in a community participating in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). It covers flooding caused by heavy rains, melting snow, inadequate drainage systems, or failed levees or dams. Consult www.fema.gov/national-flood-insurance-program.
                Consequential loss, use, and occupancy. Also known as loss of rent or business interruption insurance, consequential loss insurance covers the results of a disaster. Consequential loss can include the loss of rent or revenue to a business that occurs if the business's property cannot be used.
                Contents and personal property. This type of insurance covers building contents and personal property during periods when they are not actually located on the premises.
                General liability. General liability insurance covers the risks an owner assumes whenever the public enters the building. A claim paid under this coverage is used for medical expenses incurred by a person who is injured in the building or on the property as a result of the owner's negligence. Claims for medical or hospital payments for injuries sustained by building employees hurt in the course of their employment are covered by state laws known as workers' compensation acts.
                Casualty. Casualty insurance policies include coverage against theft, burglary, vandalism, and machinery damage, as well as health and accident insurance.
                Surety bonds.Surety bonds cover an owner against financial losses resulting from an employee's criminal acts or negligence while performing assigned duties.

            Many insurance companies offer multiperil policies for apartment buildings. Such a policy offers an insurance package that includes standard types of commercial coverage, such as fire, hazard, public liability, and casualty. Special coverage for terrorism, earthquakes, and floods is also available. Remember that flood insurance is always a separate policy.

            Condominium associations carry insurance on all the common elements, and cooperatives carry insurance on the building. Condominium owners and proprietary lease owners must carry their own casualty and liability insurance, as well as insurance to cover the destruction of their unit's contents by fire or other hazard. If condominium owners rent out space to tenants, the tenants must carry their own personal property insurance.

            The property manager may also want to carry insurance to cover the management office and its contents, as well as professional malpractice claims. For example, a property manager may want to consider purchasing errors and omissions (E&O) insurance to protect against any financial management mistakes.

    Insurance claims

        Two methods are used to determine the amount of a claim under an insurance policy. One method considers the depreciated or actual cash value of the damaged property; the property is not insured for what it would cost to replace it but rather for what it was originally worth, less the depreciation in value that results from use and the passage of time. The other method considers current replacement cost—the building or property is insured for what it would cost to rebuild or replace today. When purchasing insurance, the property manager must act on the owner's decision as to whether the property should be insured at full replacement cost or at depreciated cost. Full replacement cost coverage is generally more expensive than depreciated cost coverage.

        As with homeowners insurance policies, commercial policies include coinsurance clauses that require the insured to carry fire coverage, usually in an amount equal to 80% of a building's replacement value.

        Property managers can encounter legal issues with insurance claims. For example, if the property owner is not available to file an insurance claim, the property manager must have proper authorization, such as a power of attorney.






