Rules and Regulations 
The rules and regulations are as follows:

    The BIC/PMIC must establish and maintain a specific office location that must be accessible by the public during reasonable business hours.
    A licensee may form a business entity allowing the licensee's BIC to pay commissions to that business entity. However, for the business entity to receive compensation, all principals of the corporation must have an active real estate license.
    The BIC/PMIC may maintain multiple offices under the same name. Each office must have its own office code and BIC/PMIC.
    A broker may be the BIC/PMIC for more than one office if requested in writing and approved by the REC.
    The BIC/PMIC and licensees must conduct real estate business under the name and at the address for which the license is issued.
    The BIC/PMIC must notify the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation in writing within 10 days of any change of office name or address or change of email address.
    In the event of death or incapacitation by the BIC/PMIC, an affiliated licensee may act as BIC/PMIC for up to six months if approved by the REC.
    The BIC/PMIC must maintain written copies of all records for a minimum of five years.
    A BIC/PMIC may not advertise or offer to conduct a real estate transaction for another person without first obtaining a written listing agreement.
    When advertising real estate in any medium, including signs, print or electronically, a licensee must clearly and conspicuously identify the full name of the company with which the licensee is affiliated.
    When operating under a trade or franchise name, a licensee must clearly and conspicuously reveal the identity of the franchisee or holder of the trade name.



Duties of a Real Estate Licensee

The duties are as follows:

    A licensee must clearly reveal his license status in a personal transaction involving the purchase, sale, exchange, rental, lease, or auction of real estate in all advertising and at first substantive contact. In addition, a licensee must disclose this in underlined capital letters on the first page of the contract for sale, lease, rental, exchange, or auction.
    Trust funds received in a personal rental transaction must be deposited in the licensee's personal trust account and are not deposited in the broker's trust account unless the property is managed by the broker's company.
    Any licensee who wishes to directly or indirectly buy for her own account or for a corporation or any other business in which she holds an interest or for a close relative may do so only after making her true position clearly known in writing to all parties involved.
    A licensee must prepare all offers to purchase real estate in writing and promptly present them to the seller.
    A licensee must ensure that all terms and conditions of the transaction are included in the offer to purchase.
    A licensee must ensure that any changes or modifications made during negotiations are in writing and initialed and dated by both parties before proceeding with the transaction.
    Upon obtaining written acceptance of any offer, a licensee must promptly deliver true, executed copies to all parties. Should a seller decide not to respond to an offer, the licensee must complete an affidavit stating when and where the offer was presented. The form is titled Real Estate Offer Rejection Form (click here to view form) and is supplied by the South Carolina Real Estate Commission and must be given to the buyer or the buyer's agent in a timely manner.
    A licensee must ensure that, at closing, both the buyer and the seller receive complete and detailed closing documents properly accounting for all funds paid, received, and expended in connection with the transaction.
    A licensee may not allow or create an unreasonable delay in the closing of a transaction or act in a manner that causes failure or termination of a transaction due solely to a dispute among participating licensees concerning the division of a commission.
    All listing and buyer representation agreements must be in writing and must set forth all material terms of the relationship.



License Law   

In Section 40-57-350 (C) of the license law, the duties of the seller's agent are listed. They are

   (a) perform the terms of the written brokerage agreement made with the seller;

   (b) pursuant to subsection (A), promote the interest of the seller by performing agency duties which include:

   (i) seeking a sale at the price and terms stated in the brokerage agreement or at a price and terms acceptable to the seller, except that the real estate brokerage firm is not obligated to seek additional offers to purchase unless the brokerage agreement provides otherwise while the property is subject to a contract of sale;

   (ii) presenting in a timely manner all written offers and counteroffers to and from the seller, even when the property is subject to a contract of sale;

   (iii) disclosing to the seller all material adverse facts concerning the transaction which are actually known to the seller's agent except as directed otherwise in this section;

   (iv) advising the seller to obtain expert advice on matters that are beyond the expertise of the licensee; and

   (v) accounting in a timely manner, as required by this chapter, for all money and property received in which the seller has or may have an interest;

   (c) exercise reasonable skill and care in discharging the licensee's agency duties;

   (d) comply with all provisions of this chapter and with regulations adopted by the commission;

   (e) comply with all applicable federal, state, or local laws, rules, regulations, and ordinances related to real estate brokerage, including laws which relate to fair housing and civil rights;

   (f) preserve confidential information provided by the seller during the course of and following the agency relationship that might have a negative impact on the seller's real estate activity unless:

      (i) the seller to whom the confidential information pertains grants written consent to disclose the information;

      (ii) disclosure is required by law; or

      (iii) disclosure is necessary to defend the licensee against an accusation of wrongful conduct; or

      (iv) the information becomes public from a source other than the broker.

   The next section 40-57-35-(E) states the same duties for the agent of the buyer client.




Actions of Licensees That Are Prohibited

These actions are prohibited:

    Misrepresentation of property condition
    Making false promises to persuade or influence
    Demonstrating bad faith/dishonesty
    Representing a BIC or PMIC other than his BIC/PMIC without written consent of BIC/PMIC
    Paying commissions to unlicensed persons for conducting activity requiring a license
    Violating a buyer's freedom of choice in choosing an attorney, insurance agent, title insurance agent, or any other real estate service provider
    Guaranteeing future profits
    Making a dual set of contracts
    Conviction of forgery
    Failing to report to the Real Estate Commission in writing by certified mail notice of conviction of a crime
    Failing to account for or remit trust funds
    Not properly disclosing agency
    Not disclosing compensation received
    Receiving compensation from more than one party in a transaction without the written consent of all parties
    Representing more than one party in a transaction without the written consent of both parties
    Personally buying or selling real estate without disclosing licensed status in writing
    Writing a bad check in a real estate transaction
    Failing to disclose material facts concerning a real estate transaction
    Inducing a party to break a contract or sale or lease agreement, listing agreement, or buyer agency agreement
    Engaging in a practice or taking action inconsistent with the agency relationship that other licensees have established with their clients
    Violating federal or state law involving a real estate transaction or any order or regulation of the Real Estate Commission
    Failing to make all records available to the Real Estate Commission for inspection or failing to appear for an interview with an investigator
    Failure to submit all offers in a timely fashion
    Failure to provide current contact information



Exercising Reasonable Care

When defining the term "reasonable care" in a real estate transaction, the inference is that the licensee will behave in a manner judged to be "reasonably prudent" and will exercise the standard of care of a "competent professional" working in a "licensed, regulated profession."

This duty of reasonable care is all encompassing and includes such things as disclosing material, adverse facts about the property or the transaction, answering consumers' questions honestly, dealing fairly with all involved in the transaction, and ensuring that all documentations are made in a timely manner. It also involves an expectation of professionalism and accountability when handling the property and funds of another.

When working as a competent professional in a real estate transaction, a licensee would be expected to have a full understanding of the vocabulary of the industry and to have adequate knowledge about the properties marketed to consumers in order to answer questions. A professional would also be expected to have knowledge in areas such as financing, environmental issues, and potential hazardous conditions that might affect the health and welfare of the public, even though the licensee is not expected to be an expert in those areas.



Material Adverse Facts About Property

South Carolina License Law provides for disciplinary action in cases of misrepresentation of property condition. There are certain property conditions that are said to be "material and adverse" and therefore require disclosure. Though not delineated in license law, many of these material adverse facts are easily recognizable. Others are subject to interpretation. A material adverse fact is defined in the license law as being a condition or occurrence that is generally recognized as

    significantly and adversely affecting the value of real estate;
    significantly reducing the structural integrity of improvements to real estate;
    presenting a significant health risk to the occupants of the real estate; and

In addition, information that indicates that a party to a transaction is not able to or does not intend to meet an obligation under a contract or agreement made concerning the transaction is also considered material.



Stigmatized Property

A property that has a psychological defect rather than a material defect is said to be "stigmatized." Stigmatized properties are covered in South Carolina License Law 40-57-740 (A and B). The law states that no cause of action may arise against an owner of real estate or an agent of any party to a transaction for failure to disclose in a transaction that

    the subject real estate is or was occupied by an individual who was infected with a virus or any other disease that has been determined by medical evidence as being highly unlikely to be transmitted through occupancy of a dwelling place either presently or previously occupied by the infected individual;
    the death of an occupant of a property has occurred or the manner of the death;
    any offsite condition or hazard that does not directly impact the property being transferred; or
    any psychological impact that has no material impact on the physical condition of the property being transferred.

The law further stipulates the following:

    Nothing precludes an action against an owner of real estate or agent of the owner who makes intentional misrepresentations in response to direct inquiry from a buyer or prospective buyer with regard to psychological impacts or stigmas associated with real estate.

For example, a listing agent of a property owned by an estate may know that the previous owner of the property died in the upstairs bedroom. This would be a stigmatization to the property. The listing agent is not mandated to disclose the death unless directly asked by a potential purchaser. If asked directly, the agent must give an honest answer.

For Further Research:

As you can see from the list, the location of a registered sex offender is not listed as a stigmatization to the property. Take a look at South Carolina's sex offender registry law and note the duties of the real estate licensee (Click here to view registry law).



Residential Property Disclosure

Sellers of residential real estate of less than five units are required to complete a Residential Property Condition Disclosure Statement and provide it to the purchaser before drafting an offer to purchase. Even if the seller does not disclose material defects on this form, the licensee must still disclose known defects.

For Further Research:

The Residential Property Condition Disclosure Act has wording regarding the liability of the real estate licensee. Take a look at South Carolina Code of Laws 27-50 (http://www.scstatehouse.gov/code/t27c050.php) to note the duties of the real estate licensee under the law that requires sellers of residential property to disclose material facts.

Click here to review the Residential Property Condition Disclosure Form.



Complaint Procedure

Whenever the Commission has reason to believe that a violation of license law has occurred, an investigation must be concluded within 150 days.

The Commission must give details on the time, place, and nature of the charges and set a hearing. Hearings are conducted in accordance with the Administrative Procedures Act.

The Commission will render a decision and serve immediate written notice.

A licensee may voluntarily surrender her real estate license.

The Commission will not get involved in the resolution of disputes between licensees involving the payment of or division of a commission or fee.

A licensee may be reprimanded, fined $500 to $5,000, or may have the license revoked.

If the license is revoked, the licensee may not apply for reinstatement for three years.

Should the licensee dispute the Commission's findings, the licensee has the right to appeal the decision to an administrative law judge.



Reprimand, Fine, or Revocation

Examples of acts that would probably result in a reprimand, fine or revocation of license are as follows:

    Omission of a material fact on a license application
    Paying an unlicensed assistant to negotiate offers to purchase at an open house
    Failing to account for funds held as a security deposit
    Paying an unlicensed friend to show and market property while you are on vacation
    Failure to notify the Commission of a change in brokerage or address
    Conviction of a crime of moral turpitude
    Failure to disclose in writing a personal interest in a transaction
    Failure to disclose a brokerage relationship
    Representing a buyer or a seller without a written agreement containing all terms
    Failure to keep adequate records for the required five years





