Many homes in South Carolina are subject to rules imposed by an association variously called a property owners association, a condominium owners association, a horizontal property regime, or similar organizations subject to covenants, conditions, restrictions, bylaws, or rules (CCRBR). Owners of these properties are obligated to complete an additional statement.

The addendum states:

Purchasers should review the applicable documents (covenants, conditions, restrictions, bylaws, deeds, condominium master deed, and similar documents), review all related association issues, and investigate the owners association prior to entering into any legal agreements including a contract. Owners association charges include any dues, fees, assessments, reserve charges, or any similar charges. Purchasers are solely responsible for determining what items are covered by the owners association charges.
Specifically, "As owner, do you have any actual knowledge of answers to the following questions?" Again, the owner can respond "yes," "no," or "no representation." Owners are required to explain any "yes" answers.

Are there owners association charges or common area expenses?
Are there any owners association or CCRBR resale or rental restrictions?
Has the owners association levied any special assessments or similar charges?
Do the CCRBR or condominium master deed create guest or visitor restrictions?
Do the CCRBR or condominium master deed create animal restrictions?
Does the property include assigned parking spaces, lockers, garages, or carports?
Are keys, key bogs, or access codes required to access common or recreational areas?
Will any membership other than with the owner association transfer with the properties?
Are there any known common area problems?
Are property or common area structures subject to South Carolina Coastal Zone Management Act?
Is there a transfer fee levied to transfer the property?


Final Notes
This disclosure is not a warranty by the real estate licensees.

This disclosure is not a substitute for obtaining inspections of on-site and off-site conditions.

Purchasers have sole responsibility for obtaining inspection reports from licensed home inspectors, surveyors, engineers, or other qualified professionals.

