
Terms Defined

Agency: The relationship created when one person delegates to another the right to act on his behalf in dealings with third parties to a real estate transaction and authorizes the use of discretion while so acting.

General agency: A principal gives the licensee the power on a continuing basis to perform a variety of tasks on the principal's behalf. An example would be a property owner giving the property manager the power to act on his behalf under a management agreement. The property manager has an ongoing role through the property management agreement and makes decisions on behalf of the owner of the property, such as deciding on repairs, tenant qualifications, et cetera.

Special agency: The licensee is given the power to perform certain tasks but cannot bind the principal or make decisions on the principal's behalf. An example would be a broker employed only to find a ready, willing and able buyer, and who is neither authorized to sell the property nor to bind the principal to any contract for the sale of the property.

Expressed agency: The licensee and the consumer have "expressed" their understandings of the relationship in words. To be enforceable, these expressed agencies must be in writing.

Implied agency: A relationship that has been created between parties as a result of their actions. Implied relationships are to be avoided because they generally are misunderstood and create a high level of liability for the licensee. South Carolina License Law states that no agency relationship can be implied—only expressed in writing.

Agency coupled with an interest: A type of agency relationship in which the agent acquires an interest in the property. Such an agency cannot be revoked by the principal, nor is it terminated upon the death of the principal.

For Example

A broker may supply the plans for a subdivision, provided the developer agrees to give the broker an exclusive listing for the lots after development. The developer would not be able to revoke the listing after the broker had delivered the plans as promised.



Agency and Transaction Brokerage
Agency and Transaction Brokerage

Single agency: The brokerage has only one client involved in the specific real estate transaction. This client may be either a buyer consumer or a seller consumer. The other party is treated as a customer of the brokerage.

Dual agency: The brokerage represents both clients involved in the transaction. This generally occurs when the buyer client of a brokerage expresses an interest in a property listed with the brokerage. Dual agency requires a modification of services to both clients and requires additional disclosure and written consent in order to proceed. Consensual dual agency means that one licensee is serving both buyer and seller as client in a single transaction. The Consent for Dual Agency Agreement (click here to view the form) must be signed by the buyer client before drafting an offer and by the seller client before reviewing the offer.

Designated agency: The brokerage represents both clients involved in the transaction, so designated agency is a type of dual agency. In designated agency, two different licensees represent the two different clients of the brokerage, one representing the seller as client and one representing the buyer as client. Because the brokerage is the true agent of both clients, the BIC is still a dual agent, but no paperwork must be completed by the BIC. Designated agency requires the licensee to gain written consent before proceeding with the use of a mandatory document provided by the Real Estate Commission. The use of the Consent for Designated Agency Agreement (click here to view the form) must be signed by the buyer client before drafting an offer and by the seller client before reviewing the offer.

Transaction broker: This means a real estate brokerage firm that provides customer service to a buyer, a seller, or both in a real estate transaction. A transaction broker may be a single agent of a party in a transaction giving the other party customer service. A transaction broker also may facilitate a transaction without representing either party.

Substantive contact: This means contact in which a discussion or dialogue between the consumer and the associated licensee moves from casual introductory talk to a meaningful conversation regarding the selling or buying motives or objectives of the seller or buyer, financial qualifications, or other confidential information that if disclosed could harm the consumer's bargaining position.



Office Policy Options Available Throughout South Carolina

It is important to note that all types of brokerage relationships are not available in all companies. The BIC/PMIC has the option of determining the particular offerings available through the company. The office policy of the brokerage gives the affiliated licensee the defined practices of the brokerage when dealing with customers and clients. It is critical that the affiliated licensees have knowledge of the options available through the brokerage, because they must follow office policy of the brokerage in order to remain in compliance with license law.

Common types of brokerage relationships offered through office policies are these:

    Single-agency representation of sellers
        This is called exclusive seller agency.
        Seller is client; buyer is customer.
    Single-agency representation of buyers
        This is called exclusive buyer agency.
        Buyer is client; seller is customer.
    Single-agency representation of both buyers and sellers
        This is called pure single agency.
        Both buyers and sellers may contract for client-level representation, but no dual representation is allowed in a single real estate transaction.
    Disclosed dual representation of both buyers and sellers
        Company represents both buyers and sellers as clients.
        One or two licensees represent both buyer and seller as clients.
        Buyer clients enter a transaction involving seller clients.
        Informed consent must be gained from both clients to limit services.
        The goal is fair and equal treatment of both parties.
        Additional disclosures are required before proceeding as a dual agent.
        Use the LLR-provided Dual Agency Consent Agreement to document.
    Designated-agency representation of both buyers and sellers
        The company represents both buyers and sellers as clients.
        Two different licensees represent the individual buyer and seller clients.
        Informed consent from both clients is required.
        Service is limited by the broker-in-charge, who remains a dual agent.
        Designated agents do not represent the other client in the transaction.
        Other affiliated agents continue to represent both clients.
        Use the LLR-provided Designated Agency Consent Agreement to document.
    Transaction brokerage
        is a nonagency relationship.
        Provides customer service to one or both parties.
        Treats parties honestly.
        Discloses material adverse facts.
        Written agreement required if consumer is to be obligated to brokerage in any way.
        Customer may also request other duties through written agreement.
        LLR-provided a sample Transaction Brokerage Agreement.

Click here for a transaction brokerage template provided by the South Carolina Real Estate Commission.



Types of Agency Agreements Available in South Carolina Brokerages

Brokerages often have a variety of agency agreements with varying terms they offer the consumer. The most common are listed here:

    Open Agency Agreement
        The consumer hires as many companies as desired.
        Only the company that completes the transaction is compensated.
        The consumer also continues to represent self.

For Example

The owner tries to sell the property himself while he uses several brokerage companies to market the property on his behalf. Or a buyer client wants to use a variety of buyer agents while working with builders on her own.

    Exclusive Agency Agreement
        The consumer hires only one company to represent her.
        The consumer also continues to represent self.
        The company collects fees under the agreement if the consumer completes the transaction using a brokerage.

For Example

The owner tries to sell the property by distributing flyers around the workplace and holding an open house. She has also authorized one company to try to sell the property on her behalf. If she sells it herself, no fee is due the company.

    Exclusive Right to Represent
        This is called an exclusive-listing agreement with the seller consumer.
        This is called an exclusive buyer agency agreement with the buyer consumer.
        The consumer hires only one company to represent him.
        The consumer is no longer self-representing during the terms of the agreement.
        The company collects fees no matter who completes the transaction. It is time specific and the brokerage is paid a fee if the property sells during the term of the agreement.





Types of Agency Agreements Available in South Carolina Brokerages (cont.)

Key points

    Consumers have the choice of accepting customer service or client-level services.
    Should consumers choose client-level service, they have the choice of the type of agreement they enter into with the brokerage.
    The agency agreement must be in writing—whether open, exclusive agency, or exclusive right to represent—and must contain specific points as required by license law.
    Transaction brokerage (nonagency) involves the delivery of customer service to one or both consumers. It does not require a written agreement unless the customer is to be committed or obligated to the brokerage in any way.




Disclosure of Brokerage Relationships Under South Carolina Law

Disclosure of brokerage relationships (click here to view sample form) in South Carolina is completed before substantive contact with the consumer. The Real Estate License Law states the following:

A licensee shall provide at the first practical opportunity to all buyers and sellers with whom the licensee has substantive contact:

(1) a meaningful explanation of brokerage relationships in real estate transaction that are offered by that brokerage

(2) a disclosure of brokerage relationships form prescribed by the commission.

The prescribed disclosure of brokerage relationship form is titled South Carolina Disclosure of Real Estate Brokerage Relationships.

Click here for a copy of the mandatory form for Disclosure of Brokerage Relationships.

This disclosure form provides information, as noted in the following paragraphs, from the South Carolina Code of Laws section 40-57-370 regarding customer and client services, single, dual, and designated agency, transaction brokerage, and what to look for in any agency agreement. It is a useful tool in providing the "meaningful explanation to all buyers and sellers with whom the licensee has substantive contact."

A licensee who becomes a seller's agent must provide the disclosure form to the seller at the time the listing is obtained and signed. Acknowledgement of receipt of the form must be contained in the listing agreement.

A licensee who becomes a buyer's agent must provide the disclosure form to the buyer at the time an agency agreement is signed. Acknowledgement of receipt of the form must be contained in the buyer agency agreement.

A licensee who has substantive contact with any potential buyer or seller must provide the form at that time. At the time of contact, it is presumed that the consumer is a customer of the licensee and that the licensee will be acting as a transaction broker. That relationship remains in effect until a representation agreement is signed.

If substantive contact occurs over the phone or other electronic media, the licensee may provide the form through electronic means, including the internet, fax, or email.

Agency relationships do not exist with the consumer unless the consumer has signed a written representation agreement. Therefore, licensees should be careful not to provide client service to a consumer who has not hired the agency in writing to do so.

Brokerage Relationships disclosure requirements do not apply if

    the transaction is involving the rental or lease of property,
    the communication from the licensee is merely a solicitation of business, or
    the transaction is regarding the sale of property by auction.

For Example

If a listing agent is hosting an open house on Saturday afternoon and a buyer customer walks in, it is not necessary to distribute the disclosure document unless the contact turns substantive. The seller's agent holding the open house could show the property, could answer general questions from the consumer, and discuss such things as financing and the community.

Once the discussion moves from casual contact to a focus on real estate needs or qualification, disclosure of the brokerage relationship must be completed. The disclosure form would be given to the buyer at that time.

If a buyer walked into a real estate brokerage office and requested general information about properties for sale, disclosure would not become necessary until the licensee began to discuss a specific property or needed to prequalify the buyer in terms of ability and motivation. Before gathering such substantive information, the licensee must discuss brokerage relationship options and give the consumer the disclosure form.

After a discussion of the consumer's options, should the buyer choose client-level service, that relationship must be documented in a buyer agency agreement with the brokerage.



Gaining Informed Consent to Represent a Consumer

Informed consent is defined as "consent to a certain act that is given after a full and fair disclosure of all facts needed to make a conscious choice."

License law requires that the licensee obtain the informed consent of a consumer and that the consent be documented in writing before proceeding to act as the agent of the consumer. Should the consumer object to client-level service for whatever reason, or should the consumer not desire to sign a representation agreement, that consumer must be treated as a customer rather than a client.

Gaining informed consent generally requires discussion and disclosure of the following:

    Length of the agreement
    Type of representation agreement
        Open
        Exclusive agency
        Exclusive right to represent
    Duties of the agent
    Duties of the client
    When fees will be earned and paid
    Representation of multiple seller or buyer clients
    Potential for dual representations of seller and buyer clients
    Any limitations to full service
    Any restrictions on the termination of the agency

Key Points

It is the responsibility of the professional real estate licensee to see that informed consent to represent is gained before rendering service and that the appropriate documentation is fully understood by the consumer before signing.



Obligations of the Real Estate Licensee to Customers and Clients

South Carolina Real Estate License Law clearly defines the licensee's obligations to a customer who has not hired the brokerage for representation. A customer is generally a "do-it-yourselfer," but one who is also owed basic duties by the licensee.

    A licensee offering services to a customer as a transaction broker must do the following:
        Timely present all offers to and from the parties
        Timely account for all money and property received on behalf of a party
        Provide a meaningful explanation of brokerage relationships
        Provide an explanation of the scope of services to be provided
        Be fair and honest and provide accurate information in all dealings
        Keep confidential any information regarding price, terms, and motivation or information requested in writing by the consumer to remain confidential
    Clients of a real estate brokerage are given the following:
        All customer-level services
        Advice, counsel, and the exercise of the agent's expertise
        Advocacy on the client's behalf
        Duties as listed in license law
        Protection of a written agreement stating terms and conditions




Terms of the Written Agency Agreement

South Carolina License Law states that a listing or buyer representation agreement must be in writing and must set forth all material terms of the parties' agency relationship. The law further states that the agreements must include, but are not limited to, the following:

    A description of the duties or services to be performed for the principal, along with an explanation of the office policies of dual or designated agency if offered by the brokerage
    The amount of compensation to be paid or the method to be used in calculating the amount of compensation to be paid
    An explanation of how and when the brokerage earns compensation
    An explanation of how compensation will be divided among participating or cooperating brokers, if applicable
    The amount of retainer fees, deposits, or any other money collected before the agent's performance of any services on behalf of the principal, and an explanation of whether or not, and, if so, under what conditions such monies are refundable or payable to or on behalf of the principal
    The length of the agency relationship, setting forth specific dates for the beginning and ending of the relationship
    The signature of all parties



Terms of the Written Agency Agreement (cont.)

A listing or buyer representation agreement may not contain a provision requiring a client to notify the licensee of the intent to cancel the agreement after the expiration date.

The listing or buyer representation agreement must be clearly defined if it is intended to be "exclusive" in any way.

The agreement must clearly specify any exception or variation in the amount of commission to be paid and any circumstances that would apply.

A buyer representation agreement must provide a price or price range for property of interest to the buyer.

A listing agreement must state the price of the listed property.

A copy of the agreement must be given to the seller or the buyer at the time of signing.





Real Estate

Agency agreement: A written agreement entered into between the BIC/PMIC and the real estate consumer authorizing the conditions under which the relationship is created and the tasks to be accomplished.

Client: A consumer who has created an agency relationship with the brokerage. This relationship is expressed in the listing or buyer agency agreement or the property management or tenant representation agreement. A client of the company is owed statutory duties. This is the consumer who has hired the brokerage and for whom the brokerage provides representation.

Customer: A consumer who has not created an agency relationship with the brokerage. A customer may be self-represented or may have hired another agency to represent her interests. This is the consumer whom the agency works with but does not represent. The customer, whether buyer or seller, is to be treated honestly and is due minimum duties under the license law, including the following:

    A meaningful explanation of brokerage relationships
    An explanation of the scope of customer services
    Honesty and fairness in real estate dealings
    Disclosure of material adverse facts regarding the property
    Presentation of offers in a timely manner
    Limited confidentiality
    Compliance with all laws on the part of the licensee




Duties of the Seller's Agent

On reaching a written agreement to provide brokerage services to a seller of real estate, a seller's agent must do the following:

    Perform in accordance with the terms of the written brokerage agreement
    Promote the interests of the seller by
        seeking a sale at the price and terms stated in the brokerage agreement or at a price and terms acceptable to the seller;
        presenting in a timely manner all offers and counteroffers to and from the seller, even when the property is under contract for sale;
        disclosing to the seller all relevant facts concerning the transaction;
        advising the seller to obtain expert advice in areas that are beyond the scope of expertise of the agent;
        accounting for all money and property received in which the seller has an interest;
        exercising reasonable skill and care on the seller's behalf;
        complying with all laws; and
        preserving confidential information gained from the seller unless required by law

A licensee acting as a seller's agent may also list for sale competing properties. That agent may also offer alternative properties to prospective buyers. The documentation of this understanding is generally found in the listing agreement.

According to the South Carolina Code of Laws, Section 40-57-137, a licensee who represents a seller must treat all prospective buyers honestly.

A licensee who represents the seller may not knowingly give buyers false or misleading information about the condition of the property.

A seller's agent is not obligated to discover latent (hidden) defects in property. Nothing limits the buyer's obligation to inspect the physical condition of the property.


Key Points

    A seller agent's duty is to promote the interests of the seller.
    A seller's agent may not knowingly give the buyer false information.
    A seller's agent is not responsible for discovering latent (hidden) defects in the property.



Duties of a Buyer's Agent

On reaching a written agreement to provide brokerage services to a potential buyer of real estate, a buyer's agent must do the following:

    Perform to the terms of the written brokerage agreement
    Promote the interests of the buyer by
        seeking property at the price and terms stated in the brokerage agreement or at a price and terms acceptable to the buyer;
        presenting in a timely manner all offers and counteroffers to and from the buyer;
        disclosing to the buyer all relevant facts concerning the transaction;
        advising the buyer to obtain expert advice in areas outside the expertise of the agent;
        accounting for all money and property received in which the buyer has an interest;
        exercising reasonable skill and care;
        complying with all applicable laws; and
        preserving confidential information gained from the buyer unless required by law

A licensee acting as a buyer's agent may represent other buyers and may offer properties that interest one buyer client to other potential buyers, whether customers or clients. Documentation of this understanding is generally found in the buyer agency agreement.

A new rule in License Law 2017 is that if the buyer agent has multiple buyer clients who want to offer on the same property, the licensee must present each buyer with a multiple-buyer-client form disclosing that fact. Each buyer client must consent to the buyer agent's keeping the negotiating position of the other buyer clients confidential. This required document was not provided by the Real Estate Commission.

A licensee who represents a buyer must treat all prospective sellers honestly.

A buyer's agent may not knowingly give the seller false or misleading information about the buyer's ability to perform to the terms of a transaction.

A buyer's agent is not obligated to discover latent defects in property or to advise clients on matters outside the scope of the agent's real estate expertise.

A licensee may not limit the purchaser's choice regarding outside service providers, such as closing attorneys, home inspectors, environmental engineers, mortgage brokers, et cetera.




Working With a Customer

A licensee who represents one party in a real estate transaction (as a single agent) or who is working as a transaction broker with no clients may provide assistance to parties in the transaction by performing routine tasks known as ministerial acts. A ministerial act does not rise to the level of representation and does not create an agency relationship. Examples of ministerial acts include those on this list:

    Showing properties
    Writing and conveying offers
    Disseminating information about the community
    Disseminating information about outside service providers
    Scheduling and attending inspections, closings, et cetera.

For Example

An agent who represents the seller as client can work with buyer customers who might be interested in the seller client's property. As a service to the seller client, an agent might provide a potential purchaser with information about the community, the local schools, mortgage options, home inspectors, and closing attorneys. The provision of these services to the buyer as customer would be ministerial in nature because they do not rise to the level of advice or counsel.

Another example is a licensee who works with a buyer as customer who wishes to see an unlisted property. The property owner is considered a customer and is owed honesty, fairness, and disclosure of material facts regarding the purchaser. The agent would be working as a transaction broker and not as an agent of either party. If the licensee wishes to receive fees from either party, a transaction brokerage agreement or compensation agreement must be used to define the terms and conditions of the payment.

Many commercial practitioners "put the deal together" without representing either party, providing customer service to both consumers. In such cases, the commercial practitioner would be working as a transaction broker and providing customer service to both parties.

The caution here is that some buyers and sellers misinterpret ministerial acts to be a level of representation and begin to feel that the licensee is "their agent." This is the reason brokerage relationship disclosures must be meaningful and well understood early in the transaction.



Working With a Client

The client relationship is one of mutual trust and loyalty, as defined by John W. Reilly in The Language of Real Estate: "A client relationship is one that implies a position of trust or confidence wherein one person is usually entrusted to hold or manage property or money for another."

The term agent describes the faithful relationship owed to a client by the brokerage. The agent owes complete allegiance to the client and the duties of

    obedience to lawful instructions,
    loyalty to the client's cause,
    disclosure of all pertinent information,
    confidentiality,
    accountability, and
    reasonable care and diligence.

Because of the unusual relationship between a licensee and the client, the agent may become aware of personal or confidential information about the client. Information passed to the agent by the client during the client relationship should not be passed on to others if it will harm the client in any way. The licensee cannot disclose this confidential information, even after the relationship is terminated, unless required by law to do so.

For Example

Should a seller's agent learn that the seller client has the ability to sell the property for far less than list price, the agent should continue to keep that information confidential even after the relationship terminates. Even if the agent later represents a purchaser who becomes interested in that property, the information gained during the confidential relationship cannot be shared without the seller's written consent.

Key Points

    Confidential information gained in a client-level relationship maintains its confidential nature forever, even if the relationship is terminated by the consumer.



Two Clients in One Transaction

One reason that it is so difficult for a licensee to represent both buyer and seller as clients in a single transaction is that each client will expect full confidentiality along with full disclosure. Of course, those two duties are mutually exclusive and will cause a certain conflict of interest.

Should the brokerage find itself in the position of representing both clients in a single transaction, it must discuss the conflict of interest with both clients, receive the informed consent of both to continue, and obtain written documentation that both clients agree to the limitations of such an arrangement.

When a company policy allows single licensee dual representation of buyer and seller clients, the broker-in-charge must have definite procedures in place for disclosure of the office policy and for the possibility of dual agency occurring, a procedure for additional discussion and disclosure when the dual agency does occur, and a procedure for completion of written documentations as required by law.

Because dual representation is a modification of the previous level of service being delivered to the consumer, it is imperative that the licensee makes sure the consumer understands the limitations of the relationship.

Should a buyer or a seller client decide not to modify services under dual agency, the client remains the exclusive client of the company. The office policy will determine how the licensee proceeds with this particular consumer.

The dual agent cannot deliver undivided loyalty, will not be able to obey all client instructions, and will not be able to disclose personal or confidential information about the other client when in dual agency. The goal of dual agency is fair and equal treatment of both clients in the transaction.



Two Clients in One Transaction (cont.)

The possibility of dual agency occurring is discussed with the clients before the signing of the listing or buyer agency agreement. These agreements must contain language regarding dual agency. The consumer decides at that time whether or not to consider the possibility of dual agency.

Should dual agency occur, the dual agency consent agreement will be completed by the buyer client before the drafting of the offer to purchase and will be completed by the seller client before reviewing the offer to purchase. Should either client refuse to continue with dual agency or refuse to sign the agreement, the licensee should immediately contact the BIC for further options under office policy.

When the brokerage has two clients in a single transaction but with two different agents involved, designated agency may be an option under the company policy. Designated agency occurs when the policy allows the BIC to appoint or "designate" the agent of the seller client to exclusively represent the seller and the agent of the buyer client to exclusively represent the buyer. The BIC and all other agents remain in dual agency with limited service to each client. The individual buyer's or seller's agent, however, practices single agency.

If the company policy allows designated agency, the BIC may assign different licensees affiliated with the company as designated agents to exclusively represent different clients in the same transaction. Buyers and sellers must consent to enter into designated-agency relationships by using the designated-agency agreement. This agreement is completed by the buyer client before drafting the offer to purchase and to the seller client before reviewing the offer to purchase. Should either client refuse to go forward under designated agency or refuse to sign the agreement, the licensee should immediately contact the BIC for further options under office policy.

Though the BIC and all the associated licensees continue in dual agency, even though other licensees have been "designated" to exclusively represent the individual clients, no form is required to be completed by the BIC. The BIC may not reveal confidential information received from either client or agent to the other.



Two Clients in One Transaction (cont.)

When a buyer agent has two or more buyer clients who want to compete with each other in attempting to purchase a single property, a conflict of interest results for the buyer agent. The buyer agent's duties of disclosure and advocacy will be compromised by this conflict. Therefore, a mandatory written notification must be provided to each client stating the conflict and giving notice that confidential or bargaining information will not be shared by the buyer agent.

If one or more of the clients do not want to go forward under the disclosure, office policy should be consulted on how to proceed.




Terminating Agency
Terminating Agency

A real estate broker and all affiliated licensees owe no duty or obligation to a client following termination, expiration, completion, or performance of an agency agreement except

    accounting in a timely manner for all money and property related to and received during the relationship; and
    keeping confidential all information received during the course of the engagement, which was made confidential by request or instructions from the client, unless the client permits the disclosure by written agreement or the disclosure is required by law, or the information becomes public from a source other than the broker.

Agency can be terminated by mutual consent, completion of the transaction, expiration of the agreement, or death of either party.



