EQUAL OPPORTUNITY IN HOUSING 

    The civil rights laws that affect the real estate industry recognize the importance of having the opportunity to live where one chooses. Federal, state, and local fair housing or equal opportunity laws affect every phase of a real estate transaction, from listing to closing. Together, they help ensure that housing is not denied on the basis of an individual's race, nationality, religion, or other characteristic specified in federal, state, or local law.

    While the passage of laws may establish a code for public conduct, centuries of discriminatory practices and attitudes, reinforced by public and private conduct, are not so easily changed. Just as real estate professionals must not allow their own prejudices to interfere with the ethical and legal conduct of their profession, they must not allow discriminatory attitudes of property owners or property seekers to affect compliance with fair housing laws. Complying with fair housing laws is not always easy because it requires thoughtful consideration of both one's own actions and those of others. In addition to obeying the law and "doing the right thing," it is important to remember that failure to comply with fair housing laws not only subjects a real estate professional to both civil and criminal penalties but also constitutes grounds for disciplinary action by the licensing authority.

        In Practice

            Real estate professionals must have a thorough knowledge of federal, state, and local fair housing laws. State and local laws may be broader than the federal requirements by providing protections for more classes of persons and may be applicable to all real property transactions, not just the residential transactions that are the focus of federal law. State and local licensing rules may provide for fines, and state penalties may include suspension or revocation of an offender's license for violation of any fair housing law.

The Civil Rights Act of 1866

    The federal government's effort to end discrimination in the provision of housing began with the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1866. The law prohibits discrimination based on race in every property transaction but was largely ignored.

    Housing was not the only area subject to discrimination. The U.S. Supreme Court's 1896 decision in Plessy v. Ferguson, which involved segregated railway cars, upheld racial segregation in public facilities—the "separate but equal" doctrine. It would be a long time before that injustice was corrected. President Franklin Delano Roosevelt signed Executive Order 8802 on June 25, 1941, prohibiting racial discrimination in the national defense industry. President Harry S. Truman signed Executive Order 9981 on June 26, 1948, ending racial discrimination in the U.S. armed forces.

    In 1954, Plessy was overturned by the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in Brown v. Board of Education, which held that separate schools for black and white students were inherently unconstitutional. On September 9, 1957, President Dwight D. Eisenhower signed into law the Civil Rights Act of 1957, which authorized the Attorney General to seek federal injunctions to protect the voting rights of African Americans. Finally, in 1968, the Supreme Court, in Jones v. Mayer, held that there was a constitutional basis for the Civil Rights Act of 1866 in the 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits slavery. It is now recognized that the 1866 law prohibits all racial discrimination in the sale or rental of publicly or privately held property, without exception, whether facilitated by a real estate professional or sold or rented by the owner. Where race is involved, no exceptions apply.

    In subsequent cases, the U.S. Supreme Court has expanded the definition of the term race to include ancestral and ethnic characteristics, including certain physical, cultural, or linguistic traits that are shared by a group with a common national origin. These rulings are significant because discrimination on the basis of race, as it is now defined, allows a complaint to be brought under the provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1866.

        In Practice

            A real estate professional is not obligated to provide ethnic-diversity information to homebuyers. At issue in a 2001 case from Ohio, Hannah v. Sibcy Cline Realtors, was whether a real estate professional had the fiduciary duty to (1) inform a client whether a neighborhood was ethnically diverse or (2) direct the client to resources that provided such information. The court concluded that while real estate professionals might choose to provide such information to clients or direct clients to resources about the ethnic diversity of a particular area, the real estate professionals do so at their own risk and there is no fiduciary duty to do so. The risk, of course, is that the real estate professional might be accused of illegally steering a client to a particular neighborhood based on the racial, ethnic, or other protected characteristics of its residents. Steering is discussed in more detail later.

    The 1866 Civil Rights Act applies only to racial discrimination, but 1968 also saw passage of a federal law that prohibits specific discriminatory practices throughout the real estate industry.

FAIR HOUSING ACT 

    Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, signed into law by President Lyndon B. Johnson on April 11 of that year, was amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 and the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988, and is known as the Fair Housing Act. It prohibits discrimination in housing based on

        race,
        color,
        national origin,
        religion,
        sex,
        familial status, or
        disability.

    The Fair Housing Act also prohibits discrimination against individuals because of their association with persons in the protected classes.

    The Fair Housing Act originally prohibited discrimination based on race, color, religion, or national origin. The Housing and Community Development Act added sex to the list of protected classes, and the Fair Housing Amendments Act added disability and familial status (i.e., households with children), although an exception was made for certain housing intended for persons age 55 or older. The amended act also changed the penalties for violations of the law, making them more severe, and added the right to seek damages, such as those for noneconomic injuries (humiliation, embarrassment, inconvenience, and mental anguish).

    In 1995, Congress passed the Housing for Older Persons Act (HOPA), which repealed the requirement that housing intended for those age 55 or older have "significant facilities and services" designed for seniors. HOPA still requires that at least 80% of occupied units have one person age 55 or older living in them. The act prohibits the awarding of monetary damages against those who, in good faith, reasonably believed that property designated as housing for older persons was exempt from familial status provisions of the Fair Housing Act.

    The Fair Housing Act is administered by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and information on fair housing can be found by going to www.hud.gov and entering "fair housing" in the search box at the top of the page. HUD has established rules and regulations that further interpret the practices affected by the law. In addition, HUD distributes an equal housing opportunity poster, available at www.hud.gov. The poster declares that the office in which it is displayed promises to adhere to the Fair Housing Act and pledges support for affirmative marketing and advertising programs. Click here for the Equal Opportunity Housing Poster.

        In Practice

            When HUD investigates a real estate broker for discriminatory practices, it may consider failure to prominently display the equal housing opportunity poster in the broker's place of business as evidence of discrimination. If a real estate brokerage is accused of a fair housing violation and has not displayed the poster, the burden of proof may shift from the complainant (the party alleging discrimination) to the broker. This means that the broker would have to prove that there had been no act of discrimination rather than the complainant proving that there had been an act of discrimination.

    Definitions

        HUD's regulations provide specific definitions that clarify the scope of the Fair Housing Act.

    Dwelling

        The regulations define a dwelling as any building or part of a building designed for occupancy as a residence by one or more families. This includes a single-family house, a condominium, a cooperative, and manufactured or other factory-built housing, as well as vacant land on which any of these structures will be built.

    Family/familial status

        A family can be as small as a single individual. Familial status is defined as one or more individuals under age 18 living with a parent or guardian. It also includes a woman who is pregnant and anyone who is in the process of assuming custody of a child under age 18. Housing that qualifies for older people is exempt. Otherwise, single or multifamily housing must be made available to families with children under the same terms and conditions applied to anyone else. It is illegal to advertise properties as being for adults only or to indicate a preference for a certain number of children. Landlords and condominiums/cooperatives cannot restrict the number of occupants with the intent of eliminating families with children. Any occupancy standards must be based on objective factors, such as sanitation or safety.

            In Practice

                An elderly tenant was terminally ill and requested that no children be allowed in the vacant apartment next door because the children's noise would make the situation more difficult. The owner of the apartment building agreed and refused to rent that unit to families with children. Although the intent was to make things easier for a dying tenant, the owner was nonetheless found to have violated the Fair Housing Act by discriminating on the basis of familial status.

    Disability

        A disability is included in the Fair Housing Act as a handicap, although the word disability is now the preferred term. A disability is a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities and includes having a record of having such an impairment, or being regarded as having such an impairment, even if one does not exist. It is unlawful to discriminate against prospective buyers or tenants on the basis of disability. Persons who have AIDS are protected by fair housing laws under this classification. The classification does not include current, illegal use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance, as defined in the Controlled Substances Act.

            In Practice

                Just as the federal Fair Housing Act's protection of persons with a disability does not include those who are current users of illegal or controlled substances, it also does not extend to individuals who have been convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. The law does prohibit discrimination against those who are participating in addiction recovery programs; for instance, a landlord could lawfully discriminate against a cocaine addict but not against someone who is in a drug recovery program.

        Landlords must make reasonable accommodations to existing policies, practices, or services to permit persons with disabilities to have equal enjoyment of the premises. It would be reasonable to expect a landlord to permit a support animal (such as a guide dog) in a normally no-pets building or to provide a designated parking space in a generally unreserved lot for a person with a disability.

        People with disabilities must be permitted to make necessary, reasonable modifications to the premises at their own expense. Such modifications might include lowering door handles or installing bath rails to accommodate a person in a wheelchair. Failure to permit reasonable modification constitutes illegal discrimination.

        The law recognizes that some reasonable modifications might make a rental property undesirable to the general population. In such a case, the landlord is allowed to require that the property be restored to its previous condition when the lease period ends, aside from reasonable wear and tear. Where it is necessary to ensure with reasonable certainty that funds will be available to pay for the restorations at the end of the tenancy, the landlord may negotiate, as part of a restoration agreement, a provision requiring that the tenant pay into an interest-bearing escrow account, over a reasonable period, a reasonable amount of money not to exceed the cost of the restorations. The interest in the account accrues to the benefit of the tenant. A landlord may not increase the required security deposit for a person with a disability, however.

        The law does not prohibit restricting occupancy exclusively to persons with a disability in dwellings that are designed specifically for their accommodation.

        In newly constructed multifamily buildings with an elevator and four or more units, the public and common areas must be accessible to persons with a disability, and doors and hallways must be wide enough for wheelchairs. The entrance to each unit must be accessible, as well as the light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls. A person using a wheelchair should be able to use the kitchen and bathroom; bathroom walls should be reinforced to accommodate later installation of grab bars. Ground-floor units must meet these requirements in buildings that do not have an elevator. Real estate professionals should be aware that state and local laws may have stricter standards.

    Exemptions to the Fair Housing Act

        The federal Fair Housing Act covers most housing but does exempt

            owner-occupied buildings with no more than four units,
            single-family housing sold or rented without the use of a real estate professional, and
            housing operated by organizations and private clubs that limit occupancy to members.

        The rental of rooms or units in an owner-occupied building of no more than four units is exempt from the Fair Housing Act.

        The sale or rental of a single-family home is exempt from the Fair Housing Act when the transaction meets all of the following conditions:

            The home is owned by an individual who does not own more than three such homes at one time (and who does not sell more than one every two years).
            A real estate professional is not involved in the transaction.
            Discriminatory advertising is not used.

        Housing owned by a religious organization may be restricted to people of the same religion if membership in the organization is not restricted on the basis of race, color, or national origin. A private club that is not open to the public may restrict the rental or occupancy of lodgings that it owns to its members, as long as the lodgings are not operated commercially. Membership in a private club must be open to people of all races, colors, and national origins.

            In Practice

                The Metropolitan Club accepts members who have graduated from Grandiose University, a private institution. At its building in downtown Metropolis, the club has some sleeping rooms that it makes available to members at a nominal cost for no more than a one-week stay every year. Because the rooms are provided as a member convenience and not operated as a commercial venture, their use can be limited to members of the Metropolitan Club.

        The Fair Housing Act does not require that housing be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others.

    Housing for older persons

        As mentioned earlier, while the Fair Housing Act protects families with children, the Housing for Older Persons Act (HOPA) provides that certain properties can be restricted to occupancy by older persons. Housing intended for persons age 62 or older or housing occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit (where 80% of the units are occupied by individuals 55 or older) is exempt from the familial status protection. Such "senior housing" typically will allow temporary occupancy by younger visitors, such as permitting overnight visits for up to two weeks per year.

    Americans with Disabilities Act

        Although the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) is not a housing law, it still has a significant effect on the real estate industry. ADA requires reasonable accommodations in employment and access to goods, services, and public buildings. The law is important because real estate professionals are often employers, and their offices are public spaces. ADA's goal is to enable individuals with disabilities to become part of the economic and social mainstream of society. Information can be found online at www.ada.gov.

        Title I of ADA requires that employers, including real estate professionals, make reasonable accommodations that enable an individual with a disability to perform essential job functions. Reasonable accommodations include making the work site accessible, restructuring a job, providing part-time or flexible work schedules, and modifying equipment that is used on the job. The provisions of the ADA apply to any employer with 15 or more employees.

        Title III of ADA requires that individuals with disabilities have full accessibility to businesses, goods, and public services. As a result, building owners and managers of commercial spaces must be constantly alert to ensure that obstacles are removed. The Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) contain detailed specifications for designing parking spaces, curb ramps, elevators, drinking fountains, toilet facilities, and directional signs to ensure maximum accessibility. Unless a real estate professional is a qualified ADA expert, it is best to advise commercial clients to seek the services of an attorney, an architect, or a consultant who specializes in ADA issues.

            In Practice

                In 1999, the U.S. Supreme Court strictly limited the definition of persons with disabilities protected by the ADA. As a result, ADA excludes individuals whose disability, such as nearsightedness, can be corrected. In 2002, the U.S. Supreme Court narrowed the definition even further by stating that in determining whether a person has a disability, you may ask whether the impairment prevents or restricts the person from performing tasks that are ordinarily of central importance to daily life.

    ADA and the Fair Housing Act

        ADA exempts from its requirements:

            property that is covered by the Fair Housing Act, which already prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability, and
            property that is exempt from coverage by the Fair Housing Act, such as housing for those age 55 or older.

        Some properties are subject to both laws. For example, in an apartment complex, the rental office is a place of public accommodation. As such, it is covered by ADA and must be accessible to persons with a disability at the owner's expense. Individual rental units would be covered by the Fair Housing Act. A tenant who wished to modify the unit to make it accessible would be responsible for the cost.

        Issues of housing and disability discrimination are often litigated in the courts. For example, in Wells v. State Manufactured Homes, a 2005 case before the U.S. District Court, District of Maine, the landlord ordered the owner of a manufactured housing unit to move from the community because he claimed she violated the no-pets provision of her rental agreement. The landlord refused to make a reasonable accommodation for the owner's emotional disability by permitting her to keep a dog. She filed suit under the ADA and Fair Housing Act. The court held that there was no violation of the Fair Housing Act or the ADA. The court said she failed to establish that her mental impairment substantially limited a major life activity and so did not meet the definition of a disability under ADA.

            In Practice

                Real estate professionals need a general knowledge of ADA's provisions in dealing with clients and customers. It is necessary for a real estate broker's workplace and employment policies to comply with the law. Amendments to ADA are periodically introduced in the U.S. Congress, and it is important to be aware of changes in the law. Real estate professionals who are building managers must ensure that the properties managed are legally accessible. ADA compliance questions also may arise with regard to a client's property listed for sale or lease. Unless the real estate professional is a qualified ADA expert, it is best to advise commercial clients to seek the services of an attorney, architect, or consultant who specializes in ADA issues.

FAIR HOUSING ISSUES 
    For fair housing and other civil rights laws to accomplish their goal of prohibiting discrimination, real estate professionals must apply them routinely. Compliance also means that real estate professionals avoid violating not only the law but also the ethical standards of the profession. The following discussion examines legal and ethical issues that continue to confront real estate professionals.

    Blockbusting

        Blockbusting is the act of encouraging people to sell or rent their homes by claiming that the entry of a protected class of people into the neighborhood will have some sort of negative impact on property values. Blockbusting was a common practice during the 1950s and 1960s when unscrupulous real estate professionals profited by fueling "white flight" from cities to suburbs. Any message from a real estate professional, however subtle, that property should be sold or rented because the neighborhood is "undergoing changes" is considered blockbusting. It is illegal to assert that the presence of certain persons will cause property values to decline, crime or antisocial behavior to increase, or the quality of schools to suffer.

        A critical element in blockbusting, according to HUD, is the profit motive. A property owner may be intimidated into selling a property at a depressed price to the blockbuster, who in turn sells the property to another person at a higher price. Another term for this activity is panic selling. To avoid accusations of blockbusting, real estate professionals should use good judgment when choosing locations and methods for marketing their services and soliciting listings.

    Steering

        Steering is the channeling of homeseekers to particular neighborhoods or discouraging potential buyers from considering some areas. In the rental process, steering occurs when the landlord puts members of a protected class on a certain floor or building. Another form of steering occurs when the landlord tells a prospective tenant that no vacancy exists when, in fact, there is a vacancy. When the misstatement is made on the basis of a protected class, the prospect is steered away from that building. In any case, it is an illegal limitation of a purchaser's or renter's options.

    Advertising

        Advertisements of property for sale or rent may not include language indicating a preference or limitation. No exception to this rule exists, regardless of how subtle the choice of words. HUD's regulations include the types of language that are considered discriminatory. One such regulation can be found at https://www.hudhomenetwork.net/sites/default/files/Documents/HUD-Advertising-Guidelines.pdf.  HUD's Advertising Guidelines shows some examples of language that is permitted and language that is considered discriminatory and not permitted. An advertisement that is gender specific, such as "female roommate sought," is allowed as long as the advertiser seeks to share living quarters with someone of the same gender. The media used for promoting property or real estate services cannot target one population to the exclusion of others. The selective use of media, whether by language or geography, may have discriminatory impact. For instance, advertising property only in a Korean-language newspaper tends to discriminate against non-Koreans. Similarly, limiting advertising to a cable television channel available only to white suburbanites may be construed as a discriminatory act. If an advertisement appears in general-circulation media as well, however, it may be legal.

    Appraising

        Those who prepare appraisals or any statements of valuation—whether formal or informal, oral or written (including a comparative market analysis prepared by a real estate professional)—may consider any factors that affect value. Race, color, religion, national origin, sex, disability, and familial status are factors that may not be considered, however.

    Redlining

        The practice of refusing to make mortgage loans or issue insurance policies in specific areas for reasons other than the economic qualifications of the applicants is known as redlining. Redlining refers to literally drawing a line around particular areas. This practice is often a major contributor to the deterioration of older neighborhoods. Redlining is frequently based on racial grounds rather than on any real objection to an applicant's creditworthiness. The federal Fair Housing Act prohibits discrimination in mortgage lending and covers not only the actions of primary lenders but also activities in the secondary mortgage market. A lending institution, however, can refuse a loan solely on sound economic grounds.

    Intent and effect

        If an owner or real estate professional purposely sets out to engage in blockbusting, steering, or other unfair activities, the intent to discriminate is obvious. However, owners and real estate professionals must examine their activities and policies carefully to determine whether they have unintentional discriminatory effects. Whenever policies or practices result in unequal treatment of people in the protected classes, they are considered discriminatory, regardless of any innocent intent. This "effects" test is applied by regulatory agencies to determine whether an individual has been discriminated against.

    Response to concerns of terrorism

        Landlords and property managers have been developing new security procedures in response to concerns of terrorist attacks. These procedures have focused on protecting buildings and residents. Landlords and property managers are also educating residents on signs of possible terrorist activity and how and where to report it. At the same time, landlords and property managers need to ensure that their procedures and education do not infringe on the fair housing rights of others.

        For screening and rental procedures, it is unlawful to screen housing applicants on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, disability, or familial status. According to HUD, landlords and property managers have been inquiring about whether they can screen applicants on the basis of citizenship status. The Fair Housing Act does not specifically prohibit discrimination based solely on a person's citizenship status. Therefore, asking applicants for citizenship documentation or immigration status papers during the screening process does not violate the Fair Housing Act. For many years, the federal government has been asking for these documents in screening applicants for federally assisted housing. HUD provides a specific procedure for collecting and verifying citizenship papers.

            In Practice

                During an interview with a landlord, a woman mentions that she left her native country to study at the local university. The landlord is concerned about the woman's visa and whether it will expire during the lease term. The landlord asks the woman for documentation to determine how long she can legally live in the United States. The landlord asks for this information, regardless of her race or national origin. The landlord has not violated the Fair Housing Act.

ENFORCEMENT OF THE FAIR HOUSING ACT 

    The federal Fair Housing Act is administered by the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity under the direction of the secretary of HUD. Any aggrieved person who believes illegal discrimination has occurred may file a complaint with HUD within one year of the alleged act. HUD also may initiate its own complaint. Complaints may be reported to the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity, Department of Housing and Urban Development, Washington, DC 20410, or to the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity in care of the nearest HUD regional office. Complaints may also be submitted directly to HUD using an online form available on the HUD website.

    Upon receiving a complaint, HUD initiates an investigation. Within 100 days of the filing of the complaint, HUD either determines that reasonable cause exists to bring a charge of illegal discrimination or dismisses the complaint. During this investigation period, HUD can attempt to resolve the dispute informally through conciliation. Conciliation is the resolution of a complaint by obtaining assurance that the person against whom the complaint was filed (the respondent) will remedy any violation that may have occurred. The respondent further agrees to take steps to eliminate or prevent discriminatory practices in the future. If necessary, these agreements can be enforced through civil action.

    The aggrieved person has the right to seek relief through administrative proceedings. An administrative proceeding is a hearing held before an administrative law judge (ALJ). An ALJ has the authority to award actual damages to an aggrieved party and, if it is believed the public interest will be served, to impose a monetary penalty. HUD increased the maximum civil penalty for violation of the Fair Housing Act, effective August 16, 2016. Adjusting the previous penalty amounts for inflation, the fine is now $19,987 for the first violation that occurs on or after that date, $49,467 if there was a violation in the preceding five years, and $98,935 for the third or more violation within seven years. The penalty previously ranged from up to $16,000 for a first offense to $70,000 for a third violation within seven years.

    In addition to civil penalty amounts, actual damages and attorney's fees and costs may be awarded to the victim of housing discrimination. The ALJ also has the authority to issue an injunction to order the offender to either do something (such as rent an apartment to the complaining party), or refrain from doing something (such as acting in a discriminatory manner).

    The parties may elect civil action in federal court at any time within two years of the discriminatory act. For cases heard in federal court, unlimited punitive damages can be awarded in addition to actual damages. The court can also issue injunctions.

    The attorney general, upon finding reasonable cause to believe that any person or group is engaged in a pattern or practice of resistance to the full enjoyment of any of the rights granted by the federal fair housing laws, may file a civil action in any federal district court. Civil penalties may result in an amount not to exceed $50,000 for a first violation and an amount not to exceed $100,000 for second and subsequent violations, in addition to the victim's actual damages, attorney's fees, and costs, as well as compensation for humiliations, mental distress, and loss of housing rights. The U.S. Department of Justice is at www.justice.gov. Recent cases can be found at www.justice.gov/crt/recent-accomplishments-housing-and-civil-enforcement-section

    Complaints brought under the Civil Rights Act of 1866 are taken directly to federal courts. The only time limit for action is a state's statute of limitations for torts (injuries one individual inflicts on another).

        In Practice

            On April 10, 2017, the United States filed a complaint alleging that the owners and operators of a 16-unit rental apartment complex in Wichita, Kansas violated the Fair Housing Act on the basis of familial status by terminating the lease of a tenant who asked to add her baby granddaughter to her lease and making statements indicating that they had a policy of not renting to households with children. (United States v. Pritchard (D. Kan.))

    State and local enforcement agencies

        Many states and municipalities have their own fair housing laws. If a state or local law is substantially equivalent to the federal law, all complaints filed with HUD are referred to the local enforcement agency. To be considered substantially equivalent, the local law and its related regulations must contain prohibitions comparable to those in the federal law. In addition, the state or locality must show that its local enforcement agency takes sufficient affirmative action in processing and investigating complaints and in finding remedies for discriminatory practices. All real estate professionals should be aware of their states' fair housing laws, as well as applicable local ordinances.

    Threats or acts of violence

        Working in real estate is not generally considered dangerous, but some real estate professionals may find themselves the targets of threats or violence merely for complying with fair housing laws. The Fair Housing Act protects the rights of those who seek the benefits of the fair housing laws. It also protects owners and real estate professionals who aid or encourage the enjoyment of fair housing rights. Threats, coercion, and intimidation are punishable by criminal action. In such a case, the victim should report the incident immediately to law enforcement officials.

IMPLICATIONS FOR REAL ESTATE PROFESSIONALS 

    The real estate industry is largely responsible for creating and maintaining an open housing market. Real estate professionals are a community's real estate experts. With the privilege of profiting from real estate transactions comes the social and legal responsibilities to ensure that everyone's civil rights are protected. Establishing relationships with community and fair housing groups to discuss common concerns and find solutions to problems is a worthwhile activity. Real estate professionals who actively work to improve their community will earn a reputation for being concerned citizens, which may well translate into a larger consumer base.

    Consequences

        Fair housing is the law. The consequences for anyone who violates the law are serious. In addition to the financial penalties, the livelihood of a real estate professional may be in jeopardy if the real estate license is suspended or revoked. That the offense was unintentional is no defense. Real estate professionals must scrutinize their practices and be particularly careful not to fall victim to clients or customers who expect them to discriminate.











