Disclosure ACT
South Carolina Residential Property Condition Disclosure Act

The purpose of this act is to require owners of residential real estate to disclose facts relating to property condition. It is to be provided to the purchaser by the owner of any residential property before the time the purchaser makes an offer to purchase.

The Act applies to transfers of residential real property consisting of at least one but not more than four residential dwelling units. Most owners must provide the form; however, there is a list of 15 exemptions to the Act, including property in foreclosure, that is in an estate, or that transfers to state or federal government. Owners of new construction that has never been inhabited are also exempt from the delivery of the form.

The law is located at www.scstatehouse.gov/code/t27c050.php and a copy of the form, as well as the exemption list can be found at llr.sc.gov/re.

The duty of the real estate licensee is to disclose to each owner, in writing, the necessity for the owner to complete and deliver the form to the potential buyer. If the real estate licensee performs this duty, he is not liable if the seller does not deliver the document.



South Carolina Residential Property Condition Disclosure Act (cont.)

Regarding the information on the form, the law requires the owner to respond in one of three ways to specific questions:

    Yes—I know of a problem and am providing information or attaching a report.
    No—I am not aware of a problem.
    N/R (No Representation)—I am making no representation as to the question. I am not saying I know of a problem or that I don't know of a problem. I am just not saying.

Owners cannot hide behind "no representation" and be relieved of liability for the disclosure of what they actually know about a property. Many believe that if they are selling the property "as is," they should make no representations. That is a false belief. "As is" simply means that the owners are not making any repairs. They can be found guilty of making an intentional misrepresentation if the purchaser can prove that the owners did have actual knowledge of a defect and failed to disclose that defect on the form.

This law also states that the real estate licensee is not liable if owners provide false, inaccurate, or misleading information on the form and the real estate licensee does not know that the information was false or misleading. Real estate licensees are required to disclose known material adverse facts regarding the property under 40-57 (Real Estate License Law).

If owners discover after delivering the document that the information was false or misleading, they have two options:

    Disclose the defect on a corrected form
    Correct the problem that is the source of the false information

The real estate licensee is not to advise owners on how to answer the questions asked on the form, except to say that they should answer honestly. Most licensees will leave the form with the owners for completion. Many will provide the form to the buyer or buyer's agent as a matter of professional courtesy. Delivery of the form to the buyer before the signing of an offer to purchase is, however, a duty of the owners and not the real estate licensee.

Proper use and handling of the Residential Property Condition Disclosure Statement is a risk reduction measure for both owners and the real estate licensee.


South Carolina Vacation Time Sharing Plans Act

The purpose of the South Carolina Vacation Time Sharing Plans Act is to protect purchasers from fraud and deceptive dealings.

Definitions include:

    Vacation time sharing unit means the actual accommodation and related facilities that are a part of the time-sharing plan.
    Accommodation means a private structure designed for occupancy.
    Vacation time sharing ownership plan means an arrangement where the purchaser receives the right to use the property and facilities for a period of time per year.
    A unit week means seven consecutive days, which may be assigned to purchasers of vacation time-sharing plans.

Here is more about the Vacation Time Sharing Plans Act:

    Developers of properties intended to be sold as time-share units are required to file their intended plans with the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation.
    Vacation time-share sales are regulated by the Department of Labor, Licensing and Regulation—Real Estate Commission.
    The Vacation Time Sharing Plans Act defines the purchaser's rights in a time-sharing transaction and allows the Real Estate Commission to investigate and rescind time-share plans for violations of the act.
    In time-sharing, the purchasers generally receive a unit week as opposed to a particular property. The terms and conditions of their purchase agreement define the actual "rights" they are purchasing.
    Should consumers enter into a time-share purchase and wish to be released from the transaction, they must notify the time-share sales office that they wish to rescind the contract within five days after the date of the contract, excluding Sunday.



South Carolina Vacation Time Sharing Plans Act (cont.)

The following statement must be in the contract for the purchase of a time-share and must be in bold type, all capital letters, on a separate page that is reserved for signatures. The buyers must sign as an acknowledgement of receiving the information regarding the right to rescission.

YOU MAY CANCEL THIS CONTRACT WITHOUT PENALTY OR OBLIGATION WITHIN FIVE DAYS AFTER THE DATE YOU SIGN THIS CONTRACT, NOT INCLUDING SUNDAY IF THAT IS THE FIFTH DAY, OR THE DATE YOU RECEIVE THE DISCLOSURE STATEMENT PURSUANT TO SECTION 27-32-100, WHICHEVER OCCURS LATER. IF YOU DECIDE TO CANCEL, YOU MUST NOFITY THE SELLER IN WRITING OF YOUR INTENT TO CANCEL BY SENDING NOTICE BY CERTIFIED MAIL, RETURN RECEIPT REQUESTED, OR BY ANOTHER VERIFIABLE MEANS TO (NAME OF SELLER) AT (SELLER'S ADDRESS).

Failure to comply with the law for the first offense is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $5,000 for each violation. The second offense is up to $5,000 in fines, six months in jail, or both for each violation. The third offense is a felony and can be punishable by up to a $5,000 fine and five years in jail for each violation.




South Carolina Consumer Protection Code

This law became effective in 1975 as a means of resolving issues with usury laws. Usury means charging a rate of interest in excess of that permitted by law. The law states that on written contracts, any rate of interest may be charged. The maximum rate that a creditor plans to charge must be registered with the state. With oral contracts, the maximum rate that can be charged is 6%.

The law also does the following:

    Deals with interest charged on contracts, assumption fees, prepayment penalties on residential loans, and rights of purchasers in a real estate transaction.
    Does not set a maximum interest rate for a legal contract. Consumers are free to negotiate any terms and conditions.
    Sets assumption fees on residential loans at 1% of the unpaid balance of the loan, not to exceed $400.
    Eliminates prepayment penalties on residential loans of less than $240,000.
    States that purchasers of property have the right to choose their own attorneys and other outside service providers in a real estate transaction. This right is also given under South Carolina License Law.

Penalties for a violation include a fine of $1,500 to $7,500 if the violation was unintentional. If the actions were intentional and unconscionable, the creditor will be given a much harsher penalty. That penalty could require forfeiture of the total amount of the loan finance charge and the costs of the action. The unpaid balance of the loan can be made repayable without any loan finance charge. In addition, the fine could include double the amount of the excess loan finance charge.

The law also allows for a primary mortgage (not refinancing) that does not exceed $240,000 to repay in full at any time without a prepayment penalty.



South Carolina Homestead Exemption Act

This act was implemented to give a real estate property tax break to those who are

    65 years or older, or
    Legally blind, or
    100% disabled.

The first $50,000 of a home's tax appraisal value is exempt from property taxes for those who qualify for the homestead exemption. The application for exemption is made at the county auditor's office in the county where the dwelling is located. Failure to apply constitutes a waiver of the exemption for that year. The application for the exemption does not have to be renewed, but any changes that affect eligibility for the exemption must be reported to the county auditor. The exemption does not carry forward to a new property.

To be eligible, the owner must hold a fee simple title or life estate to the property. The property must be the applicant's primary residence. The applicant must have been a legal resident for at least one year.

If the property is jointly owned by both spouses, the exemption may be granted if either qualify.


South Carolina Non-Resident Withholding Act

This act applies to those who own and sell South Carolina property but who are not residents of the state.

At closing, a 7% tax on gain is withheld from an individual, 5% from a corporation.

The tax is on the capital gain only.

The purchaser is required to withhold the tax from the proceeds and transmit the funds to the South Carolina Department of Revenue and Taxation.

Most closing attorneys handle these responsibilities on behalf of the purchaser.

The seller may apply for a refund if the amount was overwithheld.



South Carolina Coastal Zone Management Act

Also known as the Beachfront Management Act, this law restricts docks, seawalls, and buildings seaward of designated lines. Its purpose is to protect coastal areas from erosion and to protect the dunes.

    Full disclosure to the intended purchaser is required if the property lies within the protected zone.
    A coastal zone refers to all coastal waters and submerged lands, including the counties of Berkeley, Charleston, Colleton, Dorchester, Horry, Jasper, and Georgetown.
    Fines for failure to comply range up to $10,000 or 12 months' imprisonment for each violation.
    The Coastal Zone Management Act is implemented by the South Carolina Department of Health and Environmental Control Office of Oceans and Coastal Resource Management.



South Carolina Fair Housing Law
South Carolina Fair Housing Law

The purpose of the South Carolina Fair Housing Law is to conform state law to the federal law in order to prevent duplication of efforts in investigating discrimination complaints.

Fair housing law in the state is enforced through the South Carolina Human Affairs Commission.

Complainants have 180 days to bring cause against another for a violation of fair housing rights.

The protected classes in South Carolina mirror those in federal law.



South Carolina Fair Housing Law (cont.)
South Carolina Fair Housing Law (cont.)

Protected Classes Under South Carolina and Federal Fair Housing Law

The protected classes are these:

    Race
    Color
    Religion
    National origin
    Sex
    Familial status
    Handicapped status

Some housing is exempt from the South Carolina Fair Housing Law and includes housing for the elderly. Qualified housing for the elderly may exclude families with children. Exempt housing falls into two categories:

    Housing for persons 62 years of age or older
    Housing where at least 80% of the dwellings are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older



Real Estate Property Taxes in South Carolina
Real Estate Property Taxes in South Carolina

Property taxes in South Carolina are based on property value and are called ad valorem taxes. The county assessor determines the appraisal value of the property. Then the assessment ratio is applied, along with the millage rate. Both city and county taxes are generally collected by the county in which the property is located and are disbursed back to the cities and towns on behalf of the property owners.

Actual taxes paid are based on three factors:

    Appraised value
    Assessment rate
    Millage rate

The assessment rate differs with the type of property. Properties are assessed at 6 percent of appraised value. With application, however, an owner who uses a property as a primary residence may have the assessment rate on that particular property reduced to 4%. Agricultural and industrial properties also have their own assessment rate. If the use of the property changes, so does the assessment rate.

The millage rate is the amount charged by cities and counties for providing the services covered by real property tax assessments. Also called the tax rate, the millage rate will vary depending on the particular city, county, or both in which the property is located. Local governing bodies base their millage rates on local needs. For calculations of tax due, the millage rate is converted to a decimal by dividing by 1,000. An example would be 28 mills is a multiplier of 0.028.

In calculating tax rates, the formula is as follows:

appraised value × assessment rate = assessed value

assessed value × millage rate = annual tax



Real Estate Property Taxes in South Carolina (cont.)
Real Estate Property Taxes in South Carolina (cont.)

For Example

If a property is an approved primary residence (4% assessment rate) and the appraised value is $100,000, the assessed value is $4,000. If the assessed value is $4,000 and the millage rate is 0.028, the annual tax is $112 per year.

If that same property is subject to the Homestead Exemption Act, the $50,000 deduction is taken from the $100,000 appraised value before the application of the assessment rate or the millage rate.



Practice Calculations of Property Tax

    The property is a residential investment (6% assessment rate) and appraised at $200,000. The assessed value is $12,000. The millage rate is 0.125. What is the annual tax?
    The property is an approved primary residence subject to homestead exemption for legal blindness. The appraised value is $150,000, and the millage rate for the county in which the property is located is 20 mills. What is the annual tax?

Answer: $150,000 ‒ $50,000 = $100,000; $100,000 × 0.04 [4%] = $4,000; $4,000 × 0.020 = $80

    The property is a residential second home not subject to homestead exemption, with an appraised value of $500,000, and is subject to both city and county taxes. The assessment rate for the city is 15 mills and the rate for the county is 25 mills. Determine the total property tax due on the tendered notice.



Deed Recording Fees
Deed Recording Fees

As a deed recording fee, documentary stamps are required on every deed for real property in South Carolina. The taxation rate for the stamps is calculated on the purchase price of the property at the rate of $1.85 per $500 of consideration or portion thereof.

Though the deed recording fee is almost always paid by the seller at closing, the fee for the documentation stamps is a negotiable item in the contract for purchase.

For Example

If a property is sold for $100,000, the amount due for the deed recording fee would be $1.85 × 200 [$100,000 ÷ 500 = 200], or $370.
