While the income that a property will produce is the primary indicator of value, it is not the only benefit to owning real estate as an investment. Investors in real estate look for a profit from the following sources:

Cash flow
Appreciation of the property
Tax benefits
Equity buildup through mortgage amortization
The return on a given property will be determined by a number of factors, and can be manipulated in a number of ways. Two important items that can affect return are:

investors income tax bracket, and
use of leverage.

Tax Benefits
Real estate investments offer tax shelter, that is to say, some of the income earned from the real estate is somehow tax advantaged. The principal areas of advantage are:

depreciation deductions,
capital gains taxed favorably, and
tax credits for low-income housing and rehabilitation.
To what extent these items will benefit a particular investor will be determined by the investor's income tax bracket.

Leverage
Leverage is a fancy term for using borrowed money to purchase an investment. One of the most attractive features of real estate investments is the opportunity to acquire the property with a relatively small investment and mortgage the balance. Leverage can cut both ways; if the income from the property is insufficient to service the mortgage, the investor will be required to subsidize the investment.

The principle of using leverage to your advantage can be illustrated fairly simply. If you were to invest $100,000 and receive a return of $10,000, then you would have received a 10 percent rate of return ($10,000 return divided by $100,000 initial investment).

On the other hand, what if you were to make the same $100,000 investment (at the same return) using only $10,000 of your own money while borrowing the balance required from another source? The return on your investment (not counting interest on the loan) would be 100 percent ($10,000 return divided by $10,000 initial investment). This is a simplified example, but it illustrates the dramatic effect leverage can have on total return. Leverage can be further described as positive, neutral, or negative; these terms are a comparison of the interest rate on the loan to the capitalization rate. When the capitalization rate is higher than the mortgage interest rate, then it is called positive leverage; when the mortgage interest rate exceeds the capitalization rate, then it is called negative leverage.

Pyramiding
Pyramiding refers to the process of using one property to drive the acquisition of additional properties. There are two methods of pyramiding:

Pyramiding through sale
Pyramiding through refinance
In pyramiding through sale, an investor first acquires a single property. He or she then improves the property for resale at a substantially higher price. The profit from the sale of the first property is used to purchase additional properties. Thus, the proceeds from a single investment (the point of the pyramid) provide the means for acquiring other properties. Those properties in turn are improved and sold, and the proceeds reinvested, until the investor is satisfied with his or her return. Of course, the disadvantage is that the proceeds from each sale are subject to capital gains taxation.

The goal of pyramiding through refinance is to use the value of the original property in order to drive the acquisition of additional properties, while holding on to all the properties acquired. The investor refinances the original property, and then uses the proceeds of the refinance to purchase additional properties while retaining ownership of the original investment. In turn, these properties are refinanced, enabling the investor to acquire more properties and so on. By holding on to the properties acquired, the investor not only builds an empire but also delays the capital gains taxes that would result from a sale until a later date.

