
Tax stop clause

As a result of constantly increasing property taxes in many areas of the country, a tax stop clause is becoming common in many commercial leases. A tax stop clause requires that the tenant pay any increase in taxes over the base year in addition to the contract rent.



Office Property

Rental rates for office property are usually quoted in terms of dollars per square foot annually. Often in addition to the base rent, the office tenant may be responsible for the payment of janitorial or other services on a pro rata basis.

To determine the rent per square foot of a property, follow these steps:

    Determine the total square footage of the rental premises (generally floor space only). An office that is 50 × 30 feet would equal 1,500 square feet.
    Find the total annual rent. For example, $1,850 per month × 12 months = $22,200 per year.
    Divide the total annual rent by the total square feet to determine the annual rate per square foot: $22,200 ÷ 1,500 square feet = $14.80 per square foot per year.
    Convert the annual rate to a monthly rate. In the example here, $14.80 ÷ 12 = $1.23 per square foot per month. 



Retail Property

The rent structure in retail properties is often different from the monthly rent charge to residential or office tenants. Many retail leases are percentage leases, under which the tenant pays a percentage of gross sales in addition to a base rent. It is not uncommon for the merchants to share in the cost of maintaining the common areas and other amenities. This is usually handled by a charge in addition to rent for common area maintenance. The percentage charged is negotiable, and varies depending on the nature of the business, the location of the property, and general economic conditions in the market.

In a net lease, the tenant pays some part of the property charges (such as taxes, insurance, rent, and maintenance expenses) in addition to the base rent. The monthly rental is net income for the landlord after operating costs have been paid. Leases for entire commercial or industrial buildings and the land on which they are located are usually net leases.

In a triple net lease, the tenant pays all operating and other expenses in addition to a periodic rent. Those include taxes, insurance, assessments, maintenance, utilities, and other charges related to the premises.


Calculating Percentage LEases

Percentage leases usually call for a minimum monthly rent plus a percentage of gross sales income over a stated annual amount. For example, a lease might require minimum rent of $1,300 per month plus 5 percent of the business's sales over $160,000. On an annual sales volume of $250,000, the annual rent would be calculated as follows:



Industrial Property

Like office and retail properties, the rental of industrial space is normally quoted in terms of dollars per square foot annually. The price will vary depending on the type of property and whether there is substantial land area in addition to the building area being leased. Often these leases are written on a triple net basis. This means that the tenant is responsible for all of the operating and maintenance costs on the property in addition to the base rent.


Calculating Percentage Leases
Percentage leases usually call for a minimum monthly rent plus a percentage of gross sales income over a stated annual amount. For example, a lease might require minimum rent of $1,300 per month plus 5 percent of the business's sales over $160,000. On an annual sales volume of $250,000, the annual rent would be calculated as follows:

image.png

Industrial Property
Like office and retail properties, the rental of industrial space is normally quoted in terms of dollars per square foot annually. The price will vary depending on the type of property and whether there is substantial land area in addition to the building area being leased. Often these leases are written on a triple net basis. This means that the tenant is responsible for all of the operating and maintenance costs on the property in addition to the base rent.


