
Ethics, Morality, and the Law

Ethics, morality, and the law

The first question to be asked in the study of ethics is whether ethics and morality mean the same thing. A number of philosophy professors would argue that they are synonymous, but others define them differently. Some might argue that ethics are rules set down by man, whereas morals come from a higher being. In 1836, Ralph Waldo Emerson said that, "Ethics and religion differ herein, that the one is the system of human duties commencing from man, the other, from God. Religion includes the personality of God, ethics does not."

One inherent problem with equating ethics and morality is that the standards of morality as set by different religions may vary. Would this mean that ethical behavior would also have many variations? If so, this is getting very close to accepting the concept of situational ethics, where behavior may be determined by the circumstances.

Albert Schweitzer tried to simplify the definition of ethics by saying, "Ethics, too, are nothing but reverence for life. That is what gives me the fundamental principle of morality, namely, that good consists in maintaining, promoting, and enhancing life, and that destroying, injuring, and limiting life are evil."



Ethics, Morality, and the Law

Just as ethics and morality are not synonymous, neither are ethics and law. Laws can be learned, mandated, and enforced, but no one has ever been able to legislate a sense of ethical behavior. In many cases, ethics go beyond the limitations of the law. The law draws a firm black-and-white line between right and wrong, while ethics tend to come in multiple shades of gray. An ethical dilemma is often likely to be a case of right versus right. When Joe breaks into Wal-Mart to steal a television, it's pretty obvious it is a case of right versus wrong. But is it less obvious when Jim breaks into the corner grocery store to steal bread and water for his family in flood-soaked New Orleans?

If a sense of ethics or morality does not come naturally, must it be learned? Or is it all merely a matter of conscience? Does every person have an inner sense of what is right and what is wrong and the ability to always do the right thing? Mark Twain said, "Morals are an acquirement—like music, like a foreign language, like piety, poker, paralysis—no man is born with them." Consider the infant screaming for food at 3:00 am. Does he care that his mother is totally exhausted from a long day of cooking, cleaning, and caring for the other members of the family? No—he wants to eat—NOW. Hopefully, as he grows older, he will learn to take into consideration the well-being of others in the family along with his own needs.



Ethics and the boardroom
Ethics and the boardroom

Headlines of major newspapers throughout America today often present a grim picture of corporate ethics. Take the initiative to read headlines and articles about corporate scandals that appear on the front page or business section of your local newspaper or in other online news services. It comes as no surprise that the American public is highly suspicious of big business and remains wary of the stock market. Specific names have been eliminated in the following headlines, but they may be recognizable.

"Top Bank Offers $2 Billion to Settle Enron-Related Claims"

"Major Healthcare Provider to Pay $100 Million to Settle Fraud Charges with SEC"

"Top Pentagon Officials Faulted for Role in Airplane Manufacturer Scandal"

"Former Fortune 500 CEOs Found Guilty"

"East Coast Communications Company and U.S. Settle for $715 Million"

From Enron to Bernie Madoff to yesterday's headlines, the daily news is full of stories of fraud, deceit, money laundering, perjury, and theft. Major ethical events over the past few years include familiar names such as WorldCom, Adelphia, Tyco, Bristol-Myers, AIG, and others. More recently we read about Wells Fargo's fake accounts, Mylan's EpiPen gouging, Fox News sexual harassment suit, Samsung's battery recall, and Volkswagen's emission scandal. Many of the cases have resulted in the collapse of companies, heavy fines, and prison sentences for top executives. As Warren Buffet once said, "It takes 20 years to build a reputation and five minutes to ruin it."



Ethics and the boardroom (cont.)
Ethics and the boardroom (cont.)

Where are the auditors?

Following the collapse in 2002 of Arthur Andersen, major accounting firm and auditor for Enron, for its conviction for obstruction of justice, the Justice Department turned its attention to the other surviving large accounting firms. Federal regulators began to investigate the Big Four (Deloitte, Ernst & Young, PricewaterhouseCoopers, and KPMG) firms for possibly setting up tax shelters to assist wealthy clients to evade taxes, thereby cheating both the U.S. government and fellow taxpayers out of billions of dollars. Is protecting the best interests of the client a sufficient excuse for manipulating the law? Should the government proceed to indict another major accounting firm on a felony conviction that could result in that company losing its accounting license, or is that punishment outweighed by the potential damage to thousands of the company's clients if the firm goes under? The solution to the existing ethical situation becomes an ethical dilemma of its own.



Ethics and the boardroom (cont.)
Ethics and the boardroom (cont.)

Corporate scandals

Enron may have been the first big corporate scandal to come to the public's attention, but it has certainly been followed by numerous others. Familiar names fill the business pages of major newspapers on a daily basis. Accounting firms are held responsible for giving bad (or illegal) advice to their clients. Presidents, CEOs, and CFOs of companies find themselves individually and financially liable for damages. Chief executives face both prison terms and multimillion-dollar fines. Bernie Madoff, creator of the biggest Ponzi scheme ever known, was sentenced to 150 years in prison and a forfeiture of over $17 billion. In the fall of 2013, JPMorgan Chase paid the federal government $13 billion—the largest corporate settlement in U.S. history, plus an additional $2.6 billion paid in 2014 for failure to warn clients about Bernard Madoff's multi-billion-dollar Ponzi scheme.

According to federal regulators, one family has agreed to turn over 95% of its personal assets, totaling over $1.2 billion dollars, to its privately owned corporation to pay back the government and victims of a long-running fraud. The following fictional case study is based on that case.



Corporate code of ethics

Business corporations today are all encouraged to develop a written code of ethics. In response to the public scandals of Enron, Tyco, and WorldCom, Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 that requires companies registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission to disclose whether it has adopted a Code of Ethics for all financial officers of the company. Section 406(a) of the Act requires any company that does not have such a Code to explain why they have not adopted one. The very act of sitting down to prepare such a code has proven to be extremely helpful in raising a sense of awareness of the importance of ethical business behavior. A list of companies with a corporate code of ethics includes many familiar names: AT&T, Burger King, Campbell Soup, Coca-Cola, Colgate-Palmolive, Costco, Exxon Mobil, FedEx, Ford, Hewlett-Packard, Honda of America, IBM, John Deere, Johnson & Johnson, Kraft Foods, Lockheed Martin, Lowes, Motorola, Nestlé, NIKE, Pepsi, RE/MAX, Sara Lee, Schweppes, Shell, Texas Instruments, Under Armour, Verizon, Wells Fargo, Weyerhaeuser, and Williams-Sonoma.

In our current high-tech world we also see Amazon, Apple, Dell, Facebook, Intel, LinkedIn, Microsoft, Twitter, and Yahoo with a written Code of Ethics. And if you are looking to write a Code of Ethics for your business, there are even websites that will help you—see Business-in-a-Box.com. You must remember, however, that the most perfectly written Code of Ethics will make little difference in the day-to-day operations of the business unless everyone affiliated with the company from the President or CEO down to the file clerk not only reads it, but is given time to discuss the issues involved and to see the Code in action on a daily basis.



Guidelines for ethical business

The George S. May International Company provided consulting services to businesses in a wide variety of categories for over 85 years, serving more than 500,000 clients in over 3,000 different industries. After May's death in 1962, the company continued successfully under varied leadership for many years. Unfortunately, after a series of upper management problems, the company was closed in 2011. Although written many years ago, the original George May "Guidelines for Ethical Business Operations" continue to provide a sound basis for ethical business practice. See  Guidelines for Ethical Business Operations.

(cont.)

Guidelines for Ethical Business Operations

Laws—Laws are created to help society function. Is the action you are considering legal? Do you know the laws governing the activity? In general, ignorance of a law is no excuse for breaking the law.

Rules and Procedures—Companies create specific policies and procedures to help the business function appropriately. Typically, these rules have developed as ways to keep the company successful and avoid problems. How does your planned action compare to what is stated in the company's policies and procedures?

Values—These social principles help to create society's laws and a company's policies and procedures. In turn, laws and policies reinforce the values. One example of values in operation is to ask yourself: "Does the action I'm considering follow not only the letter of the law, but also the 'spirit' of the law?" Is your action in agreement with the overall purpose of a law or rule? Or are you attempting to find a loophole?

Conscience—This internal sense of right and wrong develops from an early age. Your conscience recognizes certain principles that lead to feelings of guilt if you violate the principles. Will your actions make you feel guilty? Can you truly justify your actions?

Promises—Business is based upon trust. It is the belief that what is stated will be delivered. Will your action live up to the commitment that you made to the other person (customer, client, supplier, employee, employer) in the business relationship? Will your action build more trust?

Heroes—Every person has at least one individual who is a role model in some way. A hero may be a parent, teacher, coach, mentor, or friend. Is your action what your hero would do in the same situation? How would your hero act?

Source: George S. May International Company.



Corporate code of ethics (cont.)

As you read the guidelines, ask yourself how they may be applied to your own practice of real estate.

The first guideline is Laws. We have local, state, and national laws that affect our real estate business. Every state requires that real estate professionals be licensed and complete a specified number of hours of continuing education for relicensure. Most states have laws requiring disclosure to the consumer of agency relationships, property condition, and environmental issues. There are federal laws governing areas of communication by way of telephone, email, and faxing.

Next are Rules and Procedures. The state licensing authority publishes rules and regulations for obtaining and renewing salesperson or broker licenses, establishment of brokerage offices, handling of escrow funds, and numerous other aspects of operating a real estate business. Local REALTOR® associations have regulations regarding MLS entries and use of lockboxes and keys. Individual companies should have printed policies and procedures regarding agency representation of clients, in addition to procedures to be followed for all listings and sales.

Values and Conscience begin at the top. The sense of values and social conscience of the principal broker/owner is usually reflected in the actions of the agents affiliated with that particular company. Likewise, the ethical conduct of the managing broker is reflected in the behavior of the agents affiliated with that office.

Promises are best described by the saying, "Underpromise and overdeliver!" The sure way to gain someone's trust is to promise what you will do—and then do it.

As to Heroes, who are yours? Do you try to be like your own personal hero? Do you see yourself as a hero to a new agent in your office, to the young first-time homebuyers you helped find a home, or to the immigrant family of eight who no one else would take the time to assist?



Corporate code of ethics (cont.)

Professional associations and companies

Do companies, including real estate brokerage companies, really want to follow these guidelines and strive to perform in an ethical manner at all times? Or is the best description of the marketplace "a place set apart where men may deceive one another," as said by philosopher Anacharsis over 2,500 years ago? Although there is still a good deal of deception going on in our modern-day marketplace, apparently there is also a perceived desire on the part of companies to act honorably and ethically. This is shown in the number of professional organizations and associations that stress the importance of a code of ethics and the development of standards for ethical behavior. A brief sampling of these groups follows:

    The Better Business Bureau (BBB) has promoted fairness and integrity in the marketplace since 1912 with a stated goal to "promote and foster the highest ethical relationship between businesses and the public through voluntary self-regulation, consumer and business education, and service excellence." The BBB website will direct you to your local Better Business Bureau.
    The Ethics and Compliance Officer Association (ECOA) was founded in 1992 and currently has over 1,200 members representing the largest number of ethics and compliance practitioners in the world. In 2014, ECOA formed a strategic alliance with the Ethics Resource Center (ERC), America's oldest nonprofit advancing high ethical standards and practices in public and private institutions.
    The Institute of Business Ethics (IBE) believes that companies should always uphold the highest standards of behavior and professional conduct. On their website, they offer the article "The IBE 9 Step Model for Developing and Implementing a Code."
    In 1978, the Office of Government Ethics (OGE) was established as a result of the Ethics in Government Act. As an agency within the Executive Branch, it acts to prevent and resolve conflict of interest situations occurring with government employees.
    The Institute for Global Ethics (IGE) is dedicated to promoting ethical behavior in individuals, institutions, and nations through research, public discourse, and practical action. The IGE publishes a free Ethics Newsline® that serves as an online source for information on ethics and current events. To subscribe to the Newsline, visit the IGE.
    The National Association of REALTORS® (NAR) provided a Code of Ethics for its members as early as 1913. This living document is constantly under review and modified to meet the challenge of ongoing changes in the real estate market.

The NAR code will be discussed at length in later units. The Ethics Resource Center (ERC) is the oldest nonprofit organization in the United States devoted exclusively to the advancement of high ethical standards of practice in public and private institutions.



Ethics and the classroom
Ethics and the classroom

Mark Twain tells us that no man is born with morals. He is also credited with saying that, "It is noble to be good, and it's nobler to teach others to be good—and less trouble!" This leads us to the position of ethics in the academic environment of today.

Ethics is an important classroom issue at many levels: course curriculum, instructor choices, and student behavior.



Ethics and the classroom (cont.)

Business ethics courses

Courses in business ethics are becoming more popular and are often required on college campuses throughout the country. Following in the wake of corporate scandals, business schools in particular are recognizing the need to instill ethical standards and a basis for ethical behavior in today's students. In a study conducted by the Aspen Institute in 2007, MBA students from 15 leading business schools in the United States and Canada expressed concerns that their schools were not doing enough to prepare them for the ethical dilemmas they might face in the business world. In the same study, students did express an interest in finding employment that offered them some potential of making a contribution to society.

Changes began early at the Akron College of Business Administration, the Prudential Business Ethics Center at Rutgers, the Fisher College of Business at Ohio State, the Kellogg School of Management at Northwestern University, the Katz School of Management at the University of Pittsburgh, and the Haas School of Business at the University of California-Berkeley. According to the Aspen Institute, between 2001 and 2011 the percentage of schools requiring courses dedicated to social, ethical, and environmental issues went from 34% in 2001 to 79% in 2011, with a slight increase by 2018. By 2011, the Aspen Top 10 list was headed by the business schools at Stanford, Notre Dame, Yale, Northwestern, and University of Michigan. Harvard Business School did not participate in the Aspen study but has been actively involved in ethics training since the 1980s. Likewise, the Stern School of Business at NYU claims to have required a course in ethics for the past 30 years. Specific recognition for the best business schools for ethics on the popular Poets and Quants website name the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania as first, followed by the McIntire School of Business at the University of Virginia as second, and the Olin Business School at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, as third.

One concern is that this revived interest in the study of ethics that has come about as a result of recent corporate scandals will fade over time. Schools continually face pressure to expand their curricula to include topics that are focused on technology, the internet, globalization, and the environment to the point that there is a concern that the study of business ethics may once again become neglected.

The Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB) that accredits business schools now requires that ethics be included in the course curriculum. In 2013, the AACSB completed a major revision to their accreditation standards. The new standards place a greater emphasis on social responsibility and ethics. A 2017 update stresses the meaning of ethical understanding and reasoning as being able to identify ethical issues and addressing them in a socially responsible manner. An interesting new twist to ethics study has been the use of convicted (and now released) felons to weave more ethics training into the classroom. The following case study is based on a real-life couple.




Ethics and the classroom
Ethics and the classroom

Cheating

An even more immediate problem in colleges and universities today is that of cheating. An extraordinarily high percentage of students admit to having cheated on exams during their college years. An even greater problem is that of students pirating information from the internet and presenting it as their own work. In some cases, entire thesis papers have been downloaded and submitted. The problem is so large that there are now websites designed to monitor students' papers and to catch such offenders. Turnitin is an internet-based service that can be purchased by schools and universities that is designed to prevent plagiarism by the students. Turnitin.com is a database of internet materials, pages from books, magazines, and journals. It is also a database of other students' papers. Students submit their work to the website and the teacher is able to pull it up later with any notations for potential plagiarism or copying. In some cases, a teacher may find that an entire assignment has been "lifted" from the internet. In others, only selected sections of the paper have been copied. Often, the problem is just the lack of proper citation of the originator of the information. Working with the system, the teacher and student can often work out the problem satisfactorily whereas in the past, the student would have just received a failing grade. The website grammarly.com provides an opportunity for students to check their work for plagiarism before turning it in.

The internet is a fantastic source for research on any subject and can make the scholar's task much easier. The downside is that there is so much incorrect information appearing on the internet today that it just gets perpetuated from one article or blog to another. Good research requires careful attention to the actual source and verification of the information given. Gone are the days of searching out volumes in the library, laboriously writing out notes, and then spending long hours compiling that information into a term paper or a master's or doctoral thesis. Fewer hours spent in front of a computer in the comforts of home or dorm are certainly preferable but are not intended to provide the student with an easy way out. One professor at a small business school told of a student who was unable to defend his master's thesis at the oral jury presentation because he didn't really understand what some of the words meant!

In other cases, professors are bribed to raise a grade or turn a blind eye to classroom cheating just to keep a particular student in school because the parents are major contributors to the athletic or alumni fund. In one case, it was actually the ethics professor who was involved!




Ethics and the classroom (cont.)
Ethics and the classroom (cont.)

Future outlook

There are some encouraging changes with regard to ethics in the academic world. A few colleges have actually dropped athletic programs in favor of more concentration on scholastic achievement. Colleges and universities are developing stricter policies to circumvent internet pirating. Hopefully, the trend toward more required courses in business ethics will diminish the number of corporate fraud cases that have been seen in the past. Unfortunately, there is always a chance that Mason Cooley was right when he wrote in City Aphorisms, New York, 1988, "Reading about ethics is as likely to improve one's behavior as reading about sports is to make one into an athlete."



Ethics and the locker room

The shadow of steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs hangs over all aspects of the sports arena today. Famous sports heroes are paraded through congressional hearings; gold medals are revoked and awarded to the runners-up; and competitions are plagued with drug testing—all because some athletes are so determined to win that they will do anything to increase their physical status and power.

It broke many people's hearts when Olympic gold medalist Marion Jones admitted to using performance-enhancing drugs in 2007. She lost her medals for track-and-field events and was sent to prison for six months for lying to investigators. Today, she shares her story with young athletes in hopes that they will choose to avoid taking the drugs.

Possibly the most notorious of the athletes caught up in a doping scandal is Lance Armstrong. Armstrong won seven Tour de France titles in cycling along with many other medals. As a cancer survivor, he gained the admiration and respect of millions of people. When accused of taking performance-enhancing drugs, he denied their use, and fought hard to defend his position for many years. When he ultimately confessed to using the drugs, maintaining a defense of "everybody does it," it rocked not just the cycling world but all those who had believed in him and supported him. The USADA (United States Anti-Doping Agency) stripped him of his medals and banned him from cycling in October 2012. He resigned as chairman of the Lance Armstrong Foundation (now the Livestrong Foundation), a supporting group for cancer victims, which he had founded in 1997. Armstrong's legal battles with the federal government still continue regarding millions paid by the U.S. Postal Service for his cycling tours.




Ethics and the locker room (cont.)

Many Major League Baseball stars have been caught up in the use of steroids scandals in recent years. Some of the most well-known are Roger Clemens, Barry Bonds, Mark McGwire, and Alex Rodriguez (A-Rod). In July 2013, the League was considering banning Rodriguez from baseball for life. Ultimately, the decision was to ban him from the 2014 season. He played his last regular game in August 2016. You have to wonder: was it worth it? Rodriguez joins Clemens and Bonds who have been made aware of the long-reaching effects of these accusations. Despite being three of the biggest names in baseball history, they have been repeatedly rejected in the annual voting for the National Baseball Hall of Fame.

Promising high school athletes are wooed by major universities with scholarships, new cars, and allowances to ensure that the school gain or retain high standings in the athletic world. This has been a common practice for many years but also raises some ethical questions. Is it fair for these athletes to receive special treatment like upgraded dorm facilities, higher-quality meals, and weekly allowances? Should the star football players be excused from classes on Fridays in order to rest up for Saturday's game? Is it really okay for a professor to move a grade from D+ to C– just to maintain a basketball player's eligibility?








