AREAS OF LICENSEE INVOLVEMENT 

A real estate licensee can be profitably involved in commercial and investment real estate in a variety of ways, including:

brokerage,
tenant representation, and
property management.

LISTING AND COMPENSATION

Opportunities to market investment real estate for sale or lease are very common, and it is important to recognize that the type of property is the only significant variable. The initial considerations are exactly the same as any other type of real estate marketing.

BROKERAGE RELATIONSHIPS 
The first consideration in marketing a property is the relationship between the real estate agent and the client. The agent must be aware of the possible agency or brokerage relationships and the advantages of each.

Some of the possible relationships include:

Seller or landlord representation
Buyer or tenant representation
Single agency
Dual agency
Transaction broker
Buyers and sellers in the investment field are often more knowledgeable in the area of agency and brokerage relationships. This means that often they will require exclusive representation, whether buying or selling. When marketing the investment the agent must be aware of the needs of buyers and sellers.

EMPLOYMENT OR COMPENSATION AGREEMENTS
The types of brokerage or agency relationships are the same as all other types of real estate, and the decision of which type of relationship is just as important due to the different marketing requirements of some investments. Possible relationships include:

Exclusive right to represent. This type of compensation agreement assures the licensee of a commission if the sale or lease of the property occurs during the licensee's term of employment, regardless of who might have been procuring cause. In the case of a buyer or tenant representative, the licensee will be paid if the buyer or tenant accomplishes a transaction within the licensee's term of employment.
Exclusive agency representation. This type of compensation agreement assures the licensee of a commission if the sale or lease of the property occurs during the licensee's term of employment; however, the owner reserves the right to sell or lease the property himself without the payment of a commission. In the case of a buyer or tenant representative, the licensee will be paid if the buyer or tenant accomplishes a transaction within the licensee's term of employment, unless he or she does so without another broker involved.
Open or nonexclusive representation. This type of compensation agreement assures the licensee of a commission if the sale or lease of the property occurs during the licensee's term of employment, but only if the licensee is the procuring cause. In the case of a buyer or tenant representative, the licensee will be paid if the buyer or tenant accomplishes a transaction with the licensee as procuring cause only.
Since the needs of the investor community are so specialized, it is important that the agent be familiar with and capable of providing the level of service required in an investment transaction. Particular attention must be paid in the area of "due care" or "due diligence." This consideration should not stop the agent from taking on this type of assignment, but rather make the agent more aware of the areas of expertise required.

EMPLOYMENT OR COMPENSATION AGREEMENTS
Many agents find compensation exciting because there is an opportunity for a much larger paycheck than a typical residential transaction. This consideration should be tempered with an understanding of the additional work involved in investment brokerage.

The types of compensation available include:

Fixed percentage of sale price
Graduated percentage
Fixed fee
Fixed fee plus percentage
Retainer or hourly fee
Net listing
Each type of compensation has its good and bad points. Remember that there is no magic rule about the size or method of compensation. The agent will have to negotiate with the client to determine compensation. Let's take a brief look at each:

Fixed percentage. This doesn't require much explanation or consideration, as fixed percentage is the type of compensation that most licensees receive in a residential sale transaction. The sales price of the property is multiplied by the agreed-upon percentage in order to arrive at the amount of compensation.
Graduated percentage. This type of compensation is very common on larger properties. The compensation is percentage based, the difference being that the percentage changes based upon total price. For example, a graduated percentage may be 5 percent on the first $250,000 of the sales price, 3 percent on the next $500,000 of sales price, and 2 percent of everything above $750,000.
Fixed fee. The fee is agreed to in advance and is a fixed dollar figure for the performance of the task. The fee is contingent upon successful performance.
Fixed fee plus percentage. This type of arrangement is often used in buyer representation. The fee is negotiated in advance based on a percentage of the sales price or a fixed dollar amount. In addition, the licensee will be paid some percentage. Often a buyer representative will receive a fixed fee plus a percentage of savings from list price.
Retainer or hourly fee. This type of compensation is often very attractive to real estate licensees. The licensee receives an advance amount (retainer) or a fee for each hour of work on the property, whether or not a sale occurs. The amount of the fee could be percentage based or a fixed dollar amount. In addition, it may or may not be the total compensation to the agent. The licensee may receive a larger fee upon sale of the property with any advance payments charged against the fee. While this can be a very attractive form of compensation, the licensee must be aware that there is a much higher degree of accountability involved in these types of fees. It is advisable to keep very detailed records of the time spent and actions taken on behalf of the client. It is also advisable to discuss whether the advance payments are fully earned or subject to an accounting of time spent.
Net listing. This is an arrangement whereby the owner is guaranteed a net amount upon closing, with the licensee's compensation being any proceeds above that amount. This type of compensation is difficult from several standpoints (and illegal in some jurisdictions). The client may accept a price that will not leave adequate compensation. This can be remedied by an agreement that the client will not accept less than an agreed-upon minimum. The other peril doesn't seem perilous at all in the beginning. What if the licensee receives a very large fee? The question then becomes one of agency and fiduciary duty to the client and whether the licensee upheld the best interest of the client. This compensation arrangement should only be used after careful consideration of the potential conflicts. Many states prohibit this type of fee arrangement due to the concerns discussed. That is a solid overview of the compensation issues involved in commercial investment brokerage. There are of course as many ways to structure compensation as you and the client can imagine, but most will be a variation on one of these themes. The two basic rules still hold: get paid as often and as much as possible!


