In addition to mastering the skills and concepts unique to real estate investment transactions, a practitioner must also be keenly aware of the role played by emotion and other subjective factors in motivating the buyer and seller. Of course, this understanding is no different from that required in any transaction: A client's background, life experiences, and motivation are key elements in the acquisition (or disposal) of a real estate investment. Being able to comprehend and work with such soft factors is often the difference between success and failure.

Purchasers of commercial investment real estate fall into two broad categories:

Investor/purchaser
Owners and users

INVESTOR CONCERNS

The real estate investor/purchaser is primarily concerned with the risk posed by the investment; the property's potential for financial return; the property's liquidity; and the degree of day-to-day, hands-on management required (or desired). The investor generally values the property as one of perhaps several alternative investments or uses of capital.

OWNER/USER CONCERNS

Because the owner/user is more closely associated with the property than an outside investor, he or she is principally concerned with the property's utility, location, and image, and well as with liquidity and management issues. The owner/user values the property primarily on its ability to fulfill specific business needs.

These two types of investors are similar in a number of ways but will not find the same value in a given property. The investor will value the property based primarily on its investment return, while the owner/user will value the property primarily on its ability to fulfill specific business needs.

BROKERAGE 
Qualifying the Investment Buyer
The process of qualifying the investment buyer is much more complex than the same process in residential sales. When qualifying the investment buyer, the agent will have to take into consideration the following:

Cash and liquid assets. How much is the investor prepared to commit as a down payment? Will there be sufficient cash available to cover closing costs and any prepaid items required by the lender?
Total financial abilities. Does the investor have the financial ability to withstand a vacancy or other disruption of cash flow from the investment? What additional resources does the investor have available?
Risk tolerance. Every investor has a different level of risk tolerance. Will the investor accept an investment property that is vacant and requires lease-up? Will the investor require national tenants with corporate guarantees, or will a local tenant or new business be acceptable? The old equation of risk versus reward comes into play, and the less risk involved will appropriately limit investment returns.
Management abilities. Does the investor have any experience managing this type of investment? Is there good professional property management available, and, if so, at what cost?
Experience level. Has the investor had success with this type of investment previously? What other type of investments has the investor owned or owns currently?
Financing abilities. Does the investor have a banking or lending relationship with an institution that does this type of loan?
Suitability of investment. The securities industry has been responsible for this concern for years, and real estate professionals are now being scrutinized in the same fashion. Does the proposed investment fit the investor's abilities? Are the risks of the investment tolerable for the investor based on total financial ability and net worth?
The practitioner should qualify an investor based on these considerations in order to eliminate wasting time working on a transaction that will not generate a commission. Buyers of commercial investment property require the same counseling and help as residential buyers. Like residential buyers, investors may have unrealistic expectations about a type of property or the likely return. They may think that having managed or invested in one type of property automatically means they can invest in or manage any other type. A successful real estate practitioner is one who is able to properly counsel, assist, and qualify the investor.

Financing
Financing for the investor is also much different than the standard residential transaction. Most of the standard rules apply—good credit, appraisals, and the like—but there are additional considerations from the lender's standpoint. Some of the items a lender will be concerned with are:

cash and liquid assets for acquisition;
cash and liquid assets after acquisition;
overall property value;
property income;
debt coverage ratio; and
repayment ability independent of property income.
While most of the above have already been discussed, the most important part of the financial qualification of the property is the ability of the property to generate income for debt repayment. Many commercial lenders will use a debt coverage ratio calculation to determine the amount of money they will lend, instead of the traditional loan-to-value ratio used in residential real estate.

The debt coverage ratio is a calculation that determines loan amount based on the property net income. The debt coverage ratio is the ratio of the property net income to the principal and interest payment. The lender may have a ratio requirement of 1.2:1, which means the property net income must be 120 percent of the amount of the mortgage payment. The lender will then determine the actual loan amount based on term of loan and interest rate, with the payment amount as the fixed part of the calculation.

Once the property and borrower have been qualified, there are numerous methods available to finance the acquisition of commercial investment real estate:

Purchase-money mortgages. Similar to residential real estate, there is a ready market for conventional financing of an investment purchase. Many commercial banks will participate in this type of loan, particularly if the borrower has an existing relationship with the bank. An investor user can also often acquire financing with a Small Business Administration (SBA) guaranteed loan.
Seller financing. Many owners of investment real estate will offer owner financing. While the terms and conditions may vary from a typical residential sale, this type of financing allows the buyer and seller to structure terms that are mutually beneficial. Many times owner financing can be used on an interim basis, allowing the buyer to "lease up" the property, thereby increasing the ability to acquire long term institutional financing.
Limited partnership, real estate investment trust, or other artificial entity. In larger commercial transactions, it is not uncommon to utilize some sort of "syndication" to raise needed capital. While this can be very effective, a real estate licensee must be cautious in assisting with this type of financing because securities licensing requirements often apply to pooled investment capital.
Pension plans and other nontraditional sources. Often pension funds and retirement plans invest the fund in real estate ownership or mortgages. These can be hard to locate, but a ready source of funds. Many companies that would be purchasers and users of commercial real estate control to some extent where that company's funds are invested, perhaps providing a source of funding for a real estate acquisition.
The list on previous screen is only a brief discussion of some of the more common sources of financing available. Financing is more highly specialized in the commercial real estate investment field, and a licensee should try to locate as many lenders in each market as possible to ensure successful transactions. Regardless of which type of financing is used, there are special considerations involved in this type of financing:

Availability of financing. The availability of commercial financing for commercial real estate is subject to the same influences as all other mortgage funds. Most commercial loans are either adjustable interest loans or have calls or balloons within a ten-year period. For the last few years, there has been a steady increase in the amount and sources for commercial financing. A successful commercial broker will become familiar with all sources of funding in the community.
Recourse vs. nonrecourse. In a large commercial transaction, many investors will seek a mortgage that is nonrecourse. This means that the lenders only security for the loan is the property, and the investor has no personal liability for the debt or any deficiency that would occur in a foreclosure. While this sounds attractive, lenders will typically require a large cash investment by the investor, limiting the lenders potential exposure.
Assignment of rents clause. Most commercial loans will contain an assignment of rents clause. This clause allows the lender to collect rents and apply them to the mortgage in the event of a default.
Lender inspections. In addition to an appraisal, most lenders will require additional inspections. The most common of these is a Phase I environmental inspection. The liability for hazardous materials cleanup under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) and Superfund attaches to all persons in the chain of title (including lienholders) from the point of contamination to the present owner. This liability can be moderated by the purchaser and lender performing all due diligence required to avoid being considered a potentially responsible person under the law. When all protocols are followed, then a defense, called the innocent landowner defense, is available to the strict, joint, and several liability under CERCLA.

GATHERING AND ANALYZING DATA

The first step in effectively marketing real estate investments is a solid program of data collection and analysis. Each property will have its own unique considerations, but all will begin with at least

property type,
overall condition of the improvements,
type of construction,
neighborhood analysis,
overall market conditions,
income and expense analysis,
legal requirements (zoning, etc.), and
comparable property data.
This list may be broad in scope, but it is a good foundation for the data collection plan. The data collected from the market on comparable type property will be used to determine the appropriate capitalization rate and make market comparisons in a later step. The next step is the actual collection of the data.

The data required for the analysis is obtained from many of the same sources as the information used in residential sales:

Owners' records
Public records
Multiple listing service
Census data
Chamber of commerce
Local housing authority
Appraisers
Trade associations
Local council of governments
Tax assessment records
In-house research
This list should give you an idea of a few of the possible sources of data and the steps to begin the data collection process. Once the data has been collected, the next step is the analysis of the data.

Having discussed the income and expense analysis in detail, we will concentrate on the balance of the data and other considerations. The property will be analyzed for the following:

Income quantity
Income quality
Income durability
Special risks
All these considerations will be compared with other investments available in order to determine the appropriate rate of return and measures of value for the property being analyzed.

MEASURES OF VALUE 

When investors purchase real estate, they are trading a lump sum of capital in the present for the right to receive a stream of income in the future. The investor will have a number of concerns beyond just how much money will be made in the investment, including

total income or return,
degree of risk or safety,
liquidity of the investment,
burden of management, and
tax benefits.
Each real estate investment opportunity will have varying degrees of risk, in addition to the other factors mentioned. The investor will be making trade-offs when looking at a given property and its benefits. These measures of value are highly subjective because the personal taste and ability of individual investors will affect how they view these factors.

DEVELOPING A MARKETING PLAN 

The beginning point in any real estate sales situation is the development of a marketing plan. This is a crucial step toward a successful sale. Some of the essential elements include:

Analysis of the property
Sellers' needs
Buyer profile
Market research
Prospecting plan
Advertising plan
The sale of a commercial investment requires a more proactive approach than most residential sales. While there are a number of homebuyers in the market seeking agents, the buyers for investments are harder to reach without a good marketing plan. We will look at some of the specifics under each of these categories in order to develop a better understanding of the process.

Analysis of the property itself will involve many variables, depending on the particular type of property. However, all property analysis will have at least the following three general considerations:

Income and expense analysis
Size, location, and condition of improvements
Legal restrictions
Utilizing the skills previously discussed, commercial real estate agents must analyze the income and expense of the property to determine the existing financial condition of the property. In addition, a commercial agent will often be called upon to do a pro forma projection for the potential buyer. The analysis could also include an after-tax cash flow analysis or discounted cash flow analysis. These more sophisticated forms of analysis require assumptions about the future, and a broker must be cautious and conservative when developing these assumptions. The best possible solution would be for the potential buyer to create the assumptions of rent increases, tax rates, appreciation rates, and the like.

The analysis of the property itself will include careful research of the physical attributes of the real estate. How large is the land and the square footage of the improvements? What is the condition of the improvements, as well as the visual appeal? What types of mechanical systems exist, and what is their condition? Is there adequate parking for the current or intended use?

An analysis must then be done to determine if any legal restrictions such as zoning requirements exist, and how they will affect the utility and therefore the income of the property. Sign ordinances, business licensing, rent controls, private restrictions to the land, and other things unique to a particular user or tenant will have to be considered.


Seller's Needs
An analysis of the seller's needs begins with the price of the property. Is the seller realistic about the market value of the real estate? Does the seller require a cash sale, or will the seller participate in the financing? Further study will indicate a possible marketing time line or schedule. For instance, if the seller is desirous of a faster sale, then a strategy should be discussed to make the sale more attractive than other properties currently on the market.

The owner of commercial real estate will be more in tune to the tax ramifications of the sale (or will have an accountant's advice). The licensee should know if the owner needs some special tax considerations such as an installment sale, a tax-deferred exchange, or perhaps that the closing must occur within a particular tax year for loss timing or utilization purposes.

Often the licensee in a commercial real estate sale will need to know who is involved in the decision-making process. If a corporation owns the property, the board of directors may need to approve the sale. Without a thorough understanding of the decision-making process, the licensee may experience trouble in the offer process.

Buyer Profile
The considerations necessary for the buyer are much the same as any other buyer of real estate:

What type of property is the buyer interested in?
What areas are acceptable or unacceptable?
How much cash and financing ability does the buyer have, and when does he or she need to complete the purchase?
When marketing a property for the seller, most of the concerns about the buyer are in the realm of:

How do we reach buyers with our marketing?
What do these buyers read, where do they live, and where do they work?
Like any other marketing endeavor, a commercial broker must put a good deal of thought into how to present the property's benefits and have a plan for handling anticipated objections.

The buyer must be qualified not only financially but also with respect to investment experience, management ability, and risk tolerance. While an investor/buyer can handle professional management, a simple truth is that most buyers will stick with a type of property with which they are the most familiar and comfortable.

Market Research
Market research leads to market knowledge, and with market knowledge comes the ability to truly succeed in commercial real estate sales. When a licensee is an "expert" on a certain type of property or in a particular area, then clients will seek that person out. There are many components within each market that need to be analyzed and understood.

The first potential area of interest is the local economy. Many indicators of the local economy can be readily determined by contacting the local chamber of commerce or economic development board. Both of these entities are geared toward helping local businesses and will be able to provide a large amount of empirical data such as the following:

Local economy
Economic base
Growth rate
Tax burden
External influences
Demographics
Population
Composition of population
Age
Spendable income
Occupation
Market area definition
Population density
Supply and demand
Absorption
Capture rate
In addition to the sources mentioned above, much helpful information can be gained from the U.S. Census, local REALTOR® boards, trade associations, and local councils of government. Some property will require expanding the market research to a regional, and even national, scale.

When preparing a property for the market, a broker should carefully research the market for comparable or competing investment opportunities. Knowledge of the competition will enhance the broker's market knowledge, help determine price levels, and allow the broker to have control of the "inventory" in the marketplace.

Prospecting Plan
A well-thought-out prospecting plan will ensure maximum success. Since research and networking are vital parts of the broker's business life, prospecting will go hand in hand with the market research previously mentioned. All property will lend itself to a few basic prospecting techniques, such as:

Adjacent property owners. Reach out to all adjacent property owners. They may be interested in expanding their current holdings or may have information about other people interested in the area or type of property.
Owners of similar property. Contacting owners of similar property in different locations in the market will offer the same opportunity for networking as the adjacent property owners.
Investment clubs and groups. In almost every community, there is at least one real estate investment group. If none exists in your market, then it may well be a long-term benefit to create one. Many of these clubs meet regularly to discuss real estate investment opportunities and to learn more about real estate investments in general. You might even consider offering your expertise in real estate as a guest speaker or lecturer.
Investment seminar. Consider holding an investment seminar to reach investors directly. This could be as simple as a short evening event in your office or an elaborate venue with dinner. No matter the scale, you must promote the event or risk dismal failure. The seminar can be promoted by word of mouth, newspaper, billboard, radio, or other media. Consider holding and promoting two dates at a time to allow for attendees with a potential conflict to commit.
Investment newsletter. One of the most effective methods of staying in contact with real estate investors is with an investment newsletter. With the advent of e-mail, this can be done on a large scale with very little cost. Many believe that a written document has more potential to be read, so consider both avenues.
Material for inclusion in this information newsletter can be garnered from any number of free sources. Consider including an investment of the week or month, as well as investment and economic data for the community. Always include copious take-away value for the reader. After some period of time, you will come to be recognized as the "local expert."

Accountants, attorneys, and financial advisors. It is absolutely imperative that a commercial broker network with other professionals capable of providing referrals to qualified prospects. When networking, be sure to reciprocate with these professionals by sending them referrals, too. Include these individuals in your investment seminars and newsletters and send them information on everything you are marketing.


Advertising Plan
Advertising and promoting commercial real estate begins with the same thought process as any other real estate advertising: How shall we reach the target audience? Unlike residential real estate, the target market is not as wide or easy to identify. Some of the materials to utilize are:

Flyer or circular. A brief, one-page marketing piece that describes the property in reasonable detail. It might also include some financial information such as the NOI or cap rate. It should have enough information to encourage further inquiry, but not enough to disqualify the property from consideration. It also can be used later for mailings and direct response advertising purposes.
Presentation package. A more detailed representation of the property for presentation to clients who have shown an interest can be very effective. This may also be used to provide information to cooperating brokers and can include a rent roll, overhead photos, floor plans, and limited financial information (e.g., profit and loss or income statement).
Signs. Signs can be a touchy issue in commercial real estate. Be sure that you are sensitive to everyone's needs and follow your client's instructions. A sign on a desirable or high traffic property is great advertising for the broker but may disrupt a tenant's business. Many owners selling leased property will request that no sign be placed or, alternatively, that the For Sale sign clearly indicate "real estate only."
Multiple listing service. There are now many commercial associations of REALTORS® with multiple listing capabilities strictly for commercial real estate. Most local MLS systems can accommodate commercial listings. In addition, the Internet is a good resource for commercial real estate practitioners with open-access commercial real estate sites. Even services like Google and Yahoo are in the real estate information game.
Print media. This includes not only the old standby newspaper ad but also magazines and some nontraditional methods. Consider national print media such as magazines and journals for some property. When looking at national print media, the lead time can be extensive. There are a number of specialty advertising magazines and catalogs available for different types of property. Don't forget about trade journals and industry-specific publications. Some local newspapers will print interesting information about real estate for sale in the business section (sometimes at no cost!).
Trade groups. These can be a valuable resource for mailing list and industry leader information. Many have a public relations committee to assist with contacts and marketing.
Direct mail. This is a judgment call, but many names can be purchased with specific qualifications of the names provided. There is power in numbers, and direct mail requires large numbers for measurable success.
Electronic media. In this day and age, the list could go on forever. Some properties may deserve their own Web site, but all property can benefit from some form of computer network advertising, e-mail, chat room, and so on. Don't forget the old standby: television. From commercials to infomercials, to highly targeted cable advertising abilities, television is more cost effective each year. Always consider other media outlets in your community, such as appearing as a guest on a radio talk show.
While the above list appears extensive, it is merely intended as a basic framework for the development of the marketing plan. Each property will have its own unique opportunities and limitations.

Often the type of property being marketed will have confidentiality issues involved. This will limit some of the possible marketing avenues but will open others. Never underestimate the effectiveness of a well-thought-out and well-executed marketing plan.

Closing the Transaction
The whole point of marketing the property is to find a ready, willing, and able buyer—now what? You will be glad to know that regardless of the size or complexity of the real estate investment, the actual escrow process is substantially similar to residential real estate sales. Many commercial real estate sales will differ from a residential sale by beginning with a letter of intent. A letter of intent is a noncontractual document that lays out the basic terms of the transaction, with the details to be addressed by a formal contract drafted by an attorney. The broker will be involved most actively in the negotiations during the letter of intent stage and then again during the due diligence period of the contract once drawn.

Once the letter of intent has been executed by all parties, that letter of intent will typically be provided to an attorney for drafting of the final contract. The final contract will then be sent to the other party's attorney for finalization and approval. Once the contract has been executed, then the escrow or preclosing process can begin.

Virtually all commercial contracts will call for a due diligence or free look period. During that period the buyer may perform needed inspections, qualify for financing, and so on. At the end of the due diligence period, the contract is final and the earnest money may become nonrefundable.

It's important to cover some of the additional tasks that you might expect to handle during the due diligence and escrow period:

Removal of contingencies. During the due diligence period, the licensee can expect to schedule and coordinate a number of inspections. In some cases a buyer will first fully tour the property after a letter of intent has been executed. Most transactions will require a minimum Phase I environmental report, Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliance, as well as many other potential inspections and approvals, often driven by lender requirements.
Additional documents. Some documents will be different in a commercial transaction. One of the more important due diligence documents for leased property is the estoppel affidavit wherein the tenant acknowledges the terms of the lease, rental amounts, and other important items for the new owner. In addition, leases must be formally assigned, and, in some cases, a bill of sale for personal property must be delivered and executed. When personal property or inventory is involved in a sale, the broker must be careful to assure that the appropriate documents are prepared by qualified personnel to assure compliance with the Uniform Commercial Code.
Transfer of tenant deposits. All security, damage, and other deposits should be properly accounted for and transferred at the closing. The broker should compare the deposit amounts to the estoppel affidavits and leases to ensure accuracy.
Transfer of service contracts. The property may have recurring service contracts for maintenance, management, or other items. These should be assigned or renewed in conjunction with the purchase contract.

