Real estate investments are expensive.
Large amounts of capital are usually required, even when financing is available. 
INvesting in a real estate is difficult without expert advice. 
Investment decisions must be based on careful study of all facts, reinforced by a thorough knowledge of real estate and how it is affected by the marketplace. 

    Liquidity 
        Liquidity refers to how quickly an asset may be converted into cash. 
        Unlike stocks and bonds, real estate is not highly liquid over the short term. 
        An investor who holds stocks can easily direct a stockbroker to sell stocks when funds are needed. 
        In contrast, a real estate investor may have to sell property at a substantially lower price than desired to bring about a quick sale. 
        If market values are down, the investor who wants to refinance property to free up cash will have to settle for whatever the lender feels the market dictates. 

    Active Management 
        Real estate requires active management. 
        The investor may choose to personally manage the property or may hire a professional property manager, but management decisions still must be made. 
        If the property has residential or commercial tenants, how much rent hsould be charged? 
            Is the property and its management in compliance with all federal, state, and local laws?
            How should repairs and tenant grievances be handled? 
            What is the long-term goal of the property owner? 
            Is the property manager working to achieve that goal?
            
    Risk 
        Despite its popularity, a real estate investment does not guarantee profit. 
        It involves a high degree of risk. 
        The possibility that an investment property will decrease in value or not generate enough income to make it profitable is a factor that the investor must consider. 

    Expert Advice

True or False 
    A disadvantage of investing in real estate is that it involves a high degree of risk. 
        The Answer is: True 