Responsibility of the Purchasers
Buyers should be educated that the owner may not have knowledge of some hidden defects that might still impact the buyers. Additionally, an issue that is important to the buyers may not actually be on the disclosure form. It is the responsibility of the buyers to identify any issue that is important to them, and to hire professionals to check out the details.

Example:

The owner has never had a plumbing leak. In this situation, the owner will answer any questions about leaks with "no." A young couple is concerned that the old water pipes may leak. To protect their interests, the young couple should hire a professional to check the condition of the pipes.



Specific Examples
Property owners may challenge licensees who provide the owner property disclosure statement to them. Here are some typical scenarios and the proper response to each.

Although I'm the owner of the property, I have always used a management company to handle day-to-day problems. The company and the tenants should fill out the owner disclosure form because they know more about the condition of the property than I do.
The South Carolina Residential Property Condition Disclosure Statement found in the South Carolina Code of Laws Title 27 Chapter 50, Article 1 requires that owners of one- to four-family dwellings provide certain statements about the condition of the property before the two parties sign a purchase agreement.

I inherited the property but I have never lived there. In fact, I haven't set foot on the property in more than ten years. There is no one who knows anything about the property; thus, no one has to complete the owner disclosure form.
In the transfer of a decedent's estate, guardianship, conservatorship, or trust, the party who administers the transfers (personal representative) is NOT required to make the Property Condition Disclosure. In the future, the parties who receive the property will be required to make disclosures when they transfer ownership.

I am selling the property "as is." Therefore, I don't have to identify any problems, even if I know about them.
Some owners mistakenly try to avoid disclosure by indicating that they are selling the property in "as-is" condition. Courts in many states have interpreted this to mean that the owner does not intend to make any additional repairs to the property. The same courts generally do not allow the seller to hide behind "as is" as a method to avoid making the required disclosures. South Carolina requires that owners must disclose conditions of which they are aware that will require repairs by the buyers.

If I say, "no, there are no problems," I can be held liable if the buyers find out there are problems later. Therefore, I just don't want to say anything.
If the owners know about a problem, the sellers should check "yes." If they do not know, they should check "no." When owners know about a problem and check "no representation," the owners are liable for nondisclosure.

The tenants have complained that there is water in the basement if it rains too much. However, since I have never had to pay for any repairs, I am going to respond "no representation" to avoid any liability.
Checking "no representation" provides no relief of liability to sellers. Either the owner knows or the owner does not know. If the owner uses "no representation," buyers are likely to consider if the owner is hiding something. The owner essentially is saying, "I am not saying, 'yes, there is a problem,' and I am not saying, 'no, there is no problem.' I am just not saying."

