The brutal 1994 rape and murder of seven-year-old Megan Kanka by a previously convicted sex offender prompted public demand for broad-based community notification of sex offenders residing in a community. Megan's Law, which concerns disclosure of the residences of sex offenders and child molesters in a community, was signed into law by President Clinton on May 17, 1996.

Megan's Law has the following two components:

Sex offender registration. Sex offender registration laws are necessary because:
sex offenders pose a high risk of reoffending after release from custody;
protecting the public from sex offenders is a primary governmental interest;
the privacy interests of persons convicted of sex offenses are less important than the government's interest in public safety; and
release of certain information about sex offenders to public agencies and the general public will assist in protecting the public safety.
Sex offender community notification. Megan's Law allows the state's discretion to establish criteria for disclosure but compels them to make private and personal information on registered sex offenders available to the public. Community notification:
assists law enforcement in investigations,
establishes legal grounds to hold known sex offenders,
deters sex offenders from committing sex offenses, and
offers citizens information they can use to protect children from registered sex offenders and child molesters.
All states now have their own version of Megan's Law in addition to the federal law.

Several states include an exemption for real estate licensees with respect to disclosure requirements. Real estate professionals should check their state laws and licensing standards for guidelines regarding disclosure of the residences of registered sex offenders in the community. Applications for rental property should inquire about felony convictions, which would include offenses requiring registration as a sex offender.

For More Information

South Carolina's Law Enforcement Division maintains an active website which consumers may consult for information about South Carolina sex offenders. Real estate licensees are not obligated to discover or to disclose the presence of anyone on this list. Instead, they should encourage buyers who are concerned to independently consult the website. Applications for rental property should inquire about felony convictions, which would include offenses requiring registration as a sex offender.

