Active Fraud (Intentional Misrepresentation)
Active fraud imposes liability for knowingly making a false statement about a material fact with the intention to deceive the buyer. A fact is material if it would affect a reasonable buyer's decision to purchase the property or how much to pay for it.

In Loch Ridge Construction, Company v. Barra, 291 Ala 312, 280 So,2d 745 (1973), the buyer claimed the salesperson had fraudulently misrepresented the house to be in perfect condition, constructed in a good and workmanlike manner, and in compliance with plans and specifications approved by the FHA. The court ruled in favor of the buyer.

In Pumphrey v. Quillen, 165 Ohio St. 343, 135 N.E.2d 38 (1956), the court ruled that brokers may be held liable for fraudulent misrepresentation if they make a statement they know they cannot justify and the statement is found to be false.

Passive Fraud (Intentional Concealment)
Passive fraud imposes liability for intentionally concealing known material defects from a buyer, particularly if one or more of the following is true:

The buyer is unable or unlikely to discover such a defect without assistance, sometimes referred to as a latent defect (Cooper v. Jevne, 128 Cal. Rptr. 724 [Cal. App. 1976]; Lynn v. Taylor, 642 P.2d 131 [Kan. App. 1982]).
The defect relates to a health or safety matter (Cashion v. Ahmadi, 345 So. 2d 268 [Ala. 1977]; Gozon v. Henderson-Dewey & Assoc., Inc., 458 A.2d 605 [Pa. Sup. 1983]).
The real estate agent has led the buyer away from discovering the defect.
The real estate agent has made a false statement, believing it to be true when made, but later discovering it to be false without correcting it (Mammas v. Oro Valley Townhouses, Inc., 638 P.2d 1367 [Ariz. Ct. App. 1981]).


Passive Fraud (Intentional Concealment) (cont.)
In May v. Hopkinson, 347 S.E.2d 508 (S.C. App. 1986), the real estate agent obtained two estimates for repair work on a window. One estimate did not include repairs to the wall's structural damage. The agent did not disclose this estimate and, despite the fact that there were other indications of termites and additional problems, he informed the purchasers that the house was structurally sound. The South Carolina Court of Appeals held that the agent's actions supported a finding of fraud.

In Lynn v. Taylor, 642 P.2d 131 [Kan. App. 1982], the buyer of a termite-damaged residence sued the seller and broker for delivering a clean pest control inspection report while fraudulently concealing a negative report previously obtained by the broker. The appellate court confirmed judgment against the broker and the seller and stated that a party is under legal obligation to disclose information, including existing reports, if it has knowledge the other party would not or could not reasonably be expected to have. Failure to do so can constitute fraud, especially if the other party relies on the first party's advice.

In Century 21 Page One Realty v. Naghad, 760 S.W.2d 305 (Tex. App. 1988), the sellers listed their property with a real estate agency. A neighbor promptly called the agency and informed them of a sewage problem and threatened suit if it was not fixed before the property was sold. The real estate agent sold the property without disclosing the problem. Soon after the purchasers moved in, raw sewage leaked into their yard. The Texas Court of Appeals affirmed judgment against the agent and the seller for failing to disclose the problem.


Negligent Misrepresentation
Negligent misrepresentation imposes liability for false statements that the real estate licensee did not know were false but that reasonable care in observation would have revealed to be untrue. If a property condition disclosure form is completed by the seller, the licensee should not assist the seller in completing the form. In general, a licensee may rely on statements made by the seller unless the licensee has observed or otherwise knows of facts or conditions on the property that give reason to believe the seller's statements are untrue. Some courts go so far as to hold that an agent has a duty to tell the principal if any material information being relied upon has not been verified.

To avoid liability based on negligence, a licensee should conduct at least a visual examination of the property. That examination should focus on those property conditions, features, and potential defects that licensees in that market area are ordinarily expected and trained to recognize and understand. It is important to recognize that the inspection should not and need not extend to defects or conditions that are reasonably discoverable only by professional inspectors in such areas as land use, planning, surveying, toxic waste, hazardous materials, tax, or law. Any defects or red flags discovered should be discussed with the seller, investigated further, and disclosed to the buyer.


Negligent Misrepresentation (cont.)
In Johnson v. Greer Real Estate Co., 720 P.2d 660 (Kan. 1986), the real estate agency filling out the listing agreement transferred information from a listing on the same property made several years earlier without verifying the information. The prior listing incorrectly indicated that the house was connected to a sewer system. The property was eventually sold to a couple who specifically informed the agent that they had no interest in any property with a septic tank. The Supreme Court of Kansas affirmed a lower court decision and found that the jury could well have concluded that even if the sellers did not know the property was served by a septic tank system, a real estate agent knowledgeable about the area should have known the true facts and should have disclosed them to the buyers.

The Alaska Supreme Court noted that real estate professionals "hold themselves out to the public as having specialized knowledge of the realty they sell," and "a purchaser who relies on a material misrepresentation, even though innocently made, has a cause of action against the broker originating or communicating the misrepresentation."

To avoid similar lawsuits in South Carolina, since 2003, state law requires that owners of one- to four-family dwelling units provide their buyers with a property disclosure statement. Over time, the statement has grown from four to six pages. From the very beginning, the burden to disclose has been placed on the owner to make these disclosures, not the licensed real estate broker or salesperson.

Today, owners are obligated to provide the South Carolina Residential Property Condition Disclosure Statement rev: 11/2018 prior to forming a real estate contract. Completion by the owner places the burden of disclosure directly on the party who is most likely aware of the presence or absence of any problems. https://www.llr.sc.gov/POL/REC/RECPDF/Property%20Condition%20Disclosure%20Statement.pdf


