Negligent misrepresentation imposes liability for false statements that the real estate licensee did not know were false but that reasonable care in observation would have revealed to be untrue. If a property condition disclosure form is completed by the seller, the licensee should not assist the seller in completing the form. In general, a licensee may rely on statements made by the seller unless the licensee has observed or otherwise knows of facts or conditions on the property that give reason to believe the seller's statements are untrue. Some courts go so far as to hold that an agent has a duty to tell the principal if any material information being relied upon has not been verified.

To avoid liability based on negligence, a licensee should conduct at least a visual examination of the property. That examination should focus on those property conditions, features, and potential defects that licensees in that market area are ordinarily expected and trained to recognize and understand. It is important to recognize that the inspection should not and need not extend to defects or conditions that are reasonably discoverable only by professional inspectors in such areas as land use, planning, surveying, toxic waste, hazardous materials, tax, or law. Any defects or red flags discovered should be discussed with the seller, investigated further, and disclosed to the buyer.

In Johnson v. Greer Real Estate Co., 720 P.2d 660 (Kan. 1986), the real estate agency filling out the listing agreement transferred information from a listing on the same property made several years earlier without verifying the information. The prior listing incorrectly indicated that the house was connected to a sewer system. The property was eventually sold to a couple who specifically informed the agent that they had no interest in any property with a septic tank. The Supreme Court of Kansas affirmed a lower court decision and found that the jury could well have concluded that even if the sellers did not know the property was served by a septic tank system, a real estate agent knowledgeable about the area should have known the true facts and should have disclosed them to the buyers.

The Alaska Supreme Court noted that real estate professionals "hold themselves out to the public as having specialized knowledge of the realty they sell," and "a purchaser who relies on a material misrepresentation, even though innocently made, has a cause of action against the broker originating or communicating the misrepresentation."

To avoid similar lawsuits in South Carolina, since 2003, state law requires that owners of one- to four-family dwelling units provide their buyers with a property disclosure statement. Over time, the statement has grown from four to six pages. From the very beginning, the burden to disclose has been placed on the owner to make these disclosures, not the licensed real estate broker or salesperson.

Today, owners are obligated to provide the South Carolina Residential Property Condition Disclosure Statement rev: 11/2018 prior to forming a real estate contract. Completion by the owner places the burden of disclosure directly on the party who is most likely aware of the presence or absence of any problems. 

https://www.llr.sc.gov/POL/REC/RECPDF/Property%20Condition%20Disclosure%20Statement.pdf

