Negligent Nondisclosure
Negligent nondisclosure imposes liability for failure to exercise adequate care to discover a material defect and disclose it to the buyer.

One of the most famous cases is Easton v. Strassburger, 152 Cal. App. 3d 90 (1984). The plaintiff purchased a house that was later severely damaged by a massive landslide. Although the property had in the past experienced some earth movement and the listing broker was aware of conditions indicating the need for soil testing, no warning was given to the buyer. The California Court of Appeals ruled that, in light of certain red flags, the seller's agent was negligent in failing to perform a reasonably competent inspection (or having such an inspection performed by appropriate professionals) and revealing the problems that would have been discovered in the course of such an inspection to the buyer.

Note: This decision imposed a duty on the seller's agent to disclose defects to the buyer even though no fiduciary relationship existed between the seller's agent and the buyer.



Negligent Nondisclosure (cont.)
In Hoffman v. Connall, 108 Wash. 2d 69, 736 P.2d 242 (1987), the Supreme Court of Washington ruled in favor of a broker who innocently misrepresented a property's location and boundary lines by telling the buyer what the seller had told him. The court held that the broker would be liable for passing the seller's misinformation only if something had occurred to alert the broker of a problem, in which case the broker would have been negligent in failing to investigate. The court characterized brokers and salespeople as "marketing agents," not "structural engineers or contractors," and explained that brokers have "no duty" to verify a seller's independent representations unless they are aware of facts that "tend to indicate such representations are false."

Not all critical information is mentioned in the South Carolina Seller Property Disclosure. For example, there is no mention of property dimensions or boundaries. Agents involved in the transaction should be cautious about discussing property lines. Buyers should be encouraged to hire a surveyor in any situation in which the boundary lines could be in dispute. The fence in the back may or may not be indicative of the property line. It is always prudent to verify information regarding acreage, boundary lines, and permitted uses of the property.


Negligent Advice
Negligent advice imposes liability for giving incorrect professional advice when the licensee should have known the advice was wrong. Advice differs from a representation in that advice is a suggestion, whereas a representation is a statement of fact. In Gerard v. Peterson, 448 N.W.2d 699 (1989), an Iowa case, a real estate agent who had casually advised the buyer that it "probably wasn't necessary" to include a financing contingency in the purchase agreement was held liable for giving the buyer negligent advice.

