The practice of law is defined as

Rendering services that are peculiar to the law profession, such as preparing legal documents, giving legal advice and counsel, or construing contracts by which legal rights are secured. A broker's license can be suspended or revoked for the unlawful practice of law, whether or not fees are charged. The broker also has an ethical duty to recommend that legal counsel be obtained when the interest of either buyer or seller requires it.

There is universal uncertainty as to whether the broker's use of certain forms constitutes the practice of law. While it is permissible for the broker to help complete certain standard forms, such as a sales contract, the broker has a duty to do so with accuracy and with certainty. Such completion of forms is permissible only where it is incidental to the broker's earning a commission and not where he or she makes a separate charge for filling in the form. In most states the broker may not prepare documents such as contracts for deed, deeds, options, mortgages and certain leases.

(Reprinted with permission from The Language of Real Estate, seventh edition by John W. Reilly, Dearborn Real Estate Education, 2013.)

In many states, (including South Carolina) real estate licensees may fill in the blanks in printed, standardized forms approved by a lawyer and in connection with transactions handled by the broker in the usual course of business; however, the broker may not charge for filling in the blanks or give advice or counsel as to the legal effect and validity of such documents.

To help resolve the unauthorized-practice-of-law problem, the National Association of REALTORS® adopted Article 13 of its Code of Ethics:

REALTORS® shall not engage in activities that constitute the unauthorized practice of law and shall recommend that legal counsel be obtained when the interest of any party to the transaction requires it.
This article has been introduced in court (Crutchley v. First Trust and Savings Bank, 450 N.W.2d 877 [Iowa 1990]) as the standard of care against which a licensee's conduct should be measured. In such a case, proof of a violation of this standard is evidence upon which a judge or a jury may find the licensee negligent.

Legal Advice or Judgment
Exercising legal judgment as to which competing real estate form to use or giving advice about the legal effects of executing a joint tenancy deed constitutes a practice of law (State Bar of New Mexico v. Guardian Abstract and Title Company, Inc., 575 P.d. 943 [NM 1978]). A real estate broker who counseled a seller on the tax consequences of various forms of property transfer engaged in the unauthorized practice of law (Wolfenberger v. Madison, 357 N.E.2d 656 [IL 1976]).



