The South Carolina Disclosure of Real Estate Brokerage Relationships is a document that the state requires licensees to provide to consumers at the first substantive contact before they enter into more detailed discussions. Detailed discussions include any discussions about finances or reasons for selling or buying.

Key elements of this document include the following:

Relationship is with the brokerage firm and not with associated licensees
Firm and its associated licensees can provide basic customer-level or client-level agency representation
Basic duties to any real estate buyer or seller who are not clients
Discussion of transaction brokerage (providing limited services)
Becoming a client of the brokerage firm by entering into a written agency agreement
Seller becomes a client of the brokerage firm upon signing a formal listing agreement with the firm
Buyer becomes a client of the brokerage firm upon signing a formal buyer agency agreement with the firm
Upon entering into a written agency agreement, the real estate brokerage owes client-level duties: obedience, loyalty, disclosure, confidentiality, accounting, and reasonable skill and care, as well as advice, counsel, and assistance in negotiations.

South Carolina recognizes four types of agency relationships:

Single agency: the firm represents only one client in the same transaction.
Dual agency: the firm represents both the seller and the buyer in the same transaction (may be done only with informed consent by both parties).
Disclosed dual agency: the firm's duties are limited because the seller client and the buyer client have recognized conflicts of interest. The firm and its agents cannot advocate on behalf of one client over the other and may not disclose confidential information gained from either party.
Designated agency: the broker-in-charge (BIC) may designate one associated licensee to represent one party and another associated licensee to represent the other party. The BIC remains a dual agent. Clients must agree to this representation.
The form is a disclosure only; it is not a contract. Consumers are asked to sign and date this form to confirm that they have been given choices and to acknowledge whatever option they choose.

