
For more than 30 years, South Carolina has required owners of residential dwellings of one to four units to complete the state-mandated South Carolina Residential Property Condition Disclosure Statement.

This five-page outline addresses many potential problems and places the responsibility for disclosure of property issues squarely on the party who knows the most about the home, i.e., the seller, not the seller's agent. The seller is required to disclose problems of which he is aware.

Buyers must recognize that the Disclosure Statement is neither a guarantee that everything works, nor a warranty that someone will come back to fix something that does not work. The Disclosure Statement simply assigns responsibility for disclosure of defects to the party who is most likely to know about these problems: the seller.

Buyers also have a responsibility; they are responsible for discovery (i.e., identifying any other specific problems with the property they are buying). Their specific concern may or may not be one of the topics addressed on the Disclosure Statement.

Buyers should be advised, though, that sellers may not always be aware of problems, and thus useful information may be lacking (i.e., sellers cannot disclose that of which they do not have knowledge). Added to that caveat is the fact that, unfortunately, sellers can sometimes "forget" to mention problems.

Licensees are responsible for ensuring that both parties recognize their obligations. Licensees provide the blank Disclosure Statement to the sellers at the time they take the listing and they provide the completed form to prospective buyers.

Buyer agents are encouraged to provide a blank Disclosure Statement to their buyer clients early on. The buyers should review the statement to determine if all of their concerns are addressed by the disclosure or if they have issues that are not mentioned. Buyer agents should encourage their buyers to start the process of determining who they want to hire to do the property inspection.

