
Property Management and South Carolina License Law

Chapter 57 (§ 40-57-30) of the Code of Laws of South Carolina defines a property manager as follows:

An individual who for a fee, salary, commission, or other valuable consideration or who with the intent or expectation of receiving compensation:

    Negotiates or attempts to negotiate the rental or leasing of real estate or improvements thereon;
    Lists or offers to list and provide services in connection with the leasing or rental of real estate or improvements thereon;
    Advertises or otherwise holds himself/herself out to the public as being engaged in any of the foregoing activities.

The property manager-in-charge means "a property manager who is designated as having the responsibility over the actions of associated licensees and also the responsibility and control over liability for real estate trust accounts."

The line of authority, requirements for licensure, and supervisory responsibility between the property manager and property manager-in-charge are similar to the licensed salesperson and the broker-in-charge. In each instance, the affiliated licensee is expected to work only under the supervision of one supervising PMIC/BIC. In each instance, that responsible authority—whether property manager-in-charge or broker-in-charge—assumes responsibility for the actions of the affiliated licensee.

A real estate licensee is authorized to sell or manage property. A property management licensee, however, is not authorized to sell property and is restricted to rental management activities.

A real estate license requires 90 hours of prelicense education. A property management license requires 30 hours of prelicense education.

Each license has its own examination.

Key Point

Broker-in-charge is to real estate licensee as property manager-in-charge is to property manager.




According to Chapter 57 (§ 40-57-135),

A real estate brokerage firm shall manage residential and commercial property under a written management agreement that shall set forth, at a minimum:

    The names and signatures of authorized parties to the agreement;
    The property identification;
    The method of compensation to the licensee;
    That a management agreement may not contain an automatic renewal clause or provision unless the management agreement also contains a clause or provision that allows either party to cancel the management agreement for any cause or no cause with 30 days' notice after the original definite expiration date;
    Compensation for a future lease renewal by tenants, and if included, the contract must contain a clause in underlined capital letters on the first page providing for such future compensation; and
    Terms and conditions of the tenant rental or lease arrangements.

However, a management agreement may not contain a provision binding the property under a future listing agreement if the property is to be sold in the future, in which case a separate listing agreement is required.



Licensing Requirements for Property Management

To be eligible for property management licensure, an applicant must meet these requirements:

    Have attained the age of 18
    Hold a high school diploma or equivalent
    Submit proof of completion of prelicense education
    Pass the applicable exam
    Show proof of sponsorship by a property manager-in-charge or broker-in-charge
    Provide a physical address
    Submit to a criminal background check

To be eligible for property manager-in-charge licensure, an applicant must meet these requirements:

    Have attained the age of 21
    Hold an active property manager's license
    Have completed seven hours of instruction in property management accounting and recordkeeping approved by the Commission
    Submit to a criminal background check



Licensing Requirements for Property Management (cont.)

A property manager may not be licensed during the same period with more than one property manager-in-charge or broker-in-charge.

When a licensee becomes disassociated with the property manager-in-charge or broker-in-charge, the supervising property manager-in-charge or broker-in-charge must notify the Real Estate Commission by letter and furnish a forwarding address.

If a property management license is revoked for any reason, a new license may not be issued to the same individual within three years from the date of revocation. A person seeking reinstatement of a revoked license must meet all qualifications and conditions that apply to individuals applying for a license for the first time.

A property management license may be placed on inactive status by informing the Real Estate Commission in writing. An inactive license, however, must be renewed at the required time in order to remain on inactive status.

A license that has not been renewed by its date of expiration is lapsed and may be reinstated within six months following expiration upon payment of fees.

A license that has lapsed and has not been reinstated by the last day of the sixth month following expiration (December 31) must be canceled.

If a property management license has been placed on inactive status, has been canceled, or has been revoked, no fees can be earned from the business of property management.

Key Points

No fees can be earned when a property management license is

    inactive,
    revoked, or
    canceled.



Licensed/Unlicensed Activities in Property Management

    Each multiunit property must be managed by an onsite or offsite licensee.
    The Real Estate Commission may permit multiple multiunit rental property locations to be managed by one licensee.
    An unlicensed employee of the owner of a multiunit rental property, or an unlicensed individual who works under the supervision of a licensee, is permitted to perform only the following:
        Maintenance
        Clerical and administrative support
        Collection of rents made payable to the owner or real estate company
        Show rental units to prospective tenants
        Furnish published information
        Provide applications and lease forms
        Receive applications and leases for submission to the owner or the company for approval
    An unlicensed employee of the owner or an unlicensed individual working under the supervision of a licensee may not do the following:
        Negotiate binding contracts or lease agreements
        Vary or deviate from the rental price, terms, or conditions
        Approve applications or leases
        Arrange the terms and conditions of a lease
        Indicate to the public that the unlicensed individual has managerial authority or responsibility
    Licensees who manage property must do so under a written management agreement that sets forth the terms and conditions, including the following:
        Names and signatures of authorized parties to the agreement
        Property identification
        Method of compensation to the licensee
        Term of agreement, including definite expiration date
        Terms and conditions of tenant rental and lease agreements

The primary goals of the property manager should be to generate income and to maintain the property.



Types of Trust Funds

In the previous examination of trust funds involved in real estate sales, such funds were defined as monies under the licensee's control but belonging to others. The property manager-in-charge or broker-in-charge is directly responsible for the safety, security, and proper disposition of trust funds involved in property management, just as in real estate sales transactions.

The types of trust funds involved in property management are these:

    Security deposits
    Advance rents
    Rents collected
    Pet deposits
    Cleaning deposits
    Entertainment deposits (golf packages, etc.)



Types of Trust Funds (cont.)
Types of Trust Funds (cont.)

Upon receipt by a licensee, trust funds in property management must be turned over to the PMIC/BIC no later than the following business day and must be deposited in an account so designated rather than into the general operating account of the company. This is to prevent commingling and conversion of the funds, just as in sales transactions. Cash or certified funds must be deposited within 48 hours of receipt, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and bank holidays. The record-keeping requirements for property management trust accounts are the same as real estate sales, except for the addition of an owner's ledger and tenant's ledger in property management trust account bookkeeping.



Terms of a Lease or Rental Agreement

Checks as security deposits must be deposited within 48 hours after a lease or rental agreement is signed by the parties, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and bank holidays.

A broker-in-charge may use the same trust account for both sales and property management trust funds. Most, however, choose to separate the accounts and often use an additional trust account just for security deposits when engaging in rental management activities.

Rents collected from tenants are deposited into the trust account and disbursed to the owner and others under the terms and conditions of the property management agreement. License law requires that this be done in a timely manner. It is imperative that the PMIC/BIC who collects rents or other trust funds in check form, rather than cash, ensure that the check has cleared the bank before disbursements are made. This will avoid conversion in the event the check is returned for insufficient funds.

Rents received by a licensee who is employed by the owner of the rental property may be deposited in the owner's company operating account or similar account. Security deposits, however, must be placed into a trust account.

Additional recordkeeping requirements for property management trust funds are required in order to ensure that both tenant funds and owner funds are properly recorded and that there is full accountability for these funds.

All monies received by a PMIC/BIC in connection with a real estate rental, including security deposits, pet deposits, damage deposits, and advance rentals, must remain in the trust account until the expiration or termination of the rental transaction. At that time, the funds are disbursed in accordance with the contract that directs the PMIC/BIC to hold the funds, and a full accounting must be made to the landlord or tenant, as appropriate.

It is important to note that security deposits (trust funds) that are held on a licensee's personal rental properties must also be deposited in a trust account so designated. Licensees may have their own trust account or may deposit the security deposit into the account of the brokerage if the brokerage manages the licensee's personal property.



Provisions of a Lease Agreement

A lease agreement between an owner and a tenant is a form of contract and must contain certain provisions in order to be legal under contract law. It must also be in writing to be enforceable under the statute of frauds unless the terms of the lease are for less than one year.

A property manager should ensure that lease agreements contain the following:

    Description of the property
    Amount of rent
    When the rent is due
    Where the rent is to be paid
    The amount of any security deposits
    Where the security deposits are held in trust
    The length of the lease agreement
    Any limitations or conditions that would result in the tenant's loss of quiet enjoyment



Termination of a Lease
Termination of a Lease

A lease may be terminated by any of the following actions:

    Expiration
    Mutual agreement
    Destruction of the property
    Breach of agreement by either party
    Foreclosure

The death of either the landlord or the tenant automatically terminates a lease.

Sale of the property does not automatically terminate a lease. Usually the obligations to the tenant transfer to the new owner unless the tenant agreed to an exclusion in the lease agreement with the previous owner.

For Example

A residential tenant's lease is current until a certain date, during which time the owner decides to sell the property. The property is generally transferred with the tenant's lease in place.


South Carolina Residential Landlord and Tenant Act

The purpose of the South Carolina Residential Landlord and Tenant Act is to upgrade rental dwellings and improve the quality of housing. Therefore, it only applies to residential single and multifamily properties. It describes the rights and obligations of landlords and tenants, and provides for proper accounting for and return of security deposits. It does not refer to property managers, per se, but in the representation of owners, a property manager must be aware of the law and ensure the owner's compliance.



Rights of the Lessor (Landlord/Owner)
Rights of the Lessor (Landlord/Owner)

The rights of the lessor are as follows:

    Right to rent under the terms of the lease agreement with the lessee
    Right to repossess for breach of the lease agreement
    Right to dispose of lessee's abandoned property if less than $500 value
    Right to enter property
        anytime in an emergency,
        With 24 hours' notice to inspect or repair property,
        between 9 a.m. and 6 p.m. for regularly scheduled maintenance covered in lease agreement, and
        between 8 a.m. and 8 p.m. for providing services requested by the tenant
    Right to recover damages



Duties of the Lessor (Landlord/Owner)
Duties of the Lessor (Landlord/Owner)

The duties of the lessor are these:

    Return security deposit with full accounting within 30 days of the termination of the lease
        If the landlord fails to return to the tenant any prepaid rent or security deposit, the tenant may recover money equal to three times the amount wrongfully withheld, along with reasonable attorney's fees.
    Make sure lessee is provided owner's or agent's name and address
    Maintain the premises
    Provide essential services:
        Running water/hot water
        Electricity
        Heat
        Safe and habitable premises
    Comply with health regulations
    Maintain the facilities and appliances

For example, a landlord would be required to repair a dishwasher during the terms of a lease agreement but would not have to add cable television unless a part of lease agreement with tenant.


Rights of the Lessee (Tenant)
Rights of the Lessee (Tenant)

The lessee's rights are these:

    Right to quiet enjoyment of the premises.
    Right to use the premises as described in the lease agreement. To do otherwise would make the lease voidable at the discretion of the owner/landlord.
    Right to terminate the lease for breach of the agreement after giving the lessor written notice and right to cure (make it right). If the tenant is forced to move due to this, it is called constructive eviction.
    Right to be free from retaliation by the lessor if the lessee makes a complaint about a violation of a health or building code.



Duties of the Lessee (Tenant)
Duties of the Lessee (Tenant)

The lessee's duties are these:

    Pay rent on time
    Maintain premises in a safe and clean manner
    Allow landlord reasonable access
    Comply with rules and regulations of tenancy
    Use the property as a dwelling only
    Do not disturb other tenants

The South Carolina Residential Landlord and Tenant Act is enforced through the legal system. Cases are heard and resolved in magistrates' courts throughout the state.



Duties of the Lessee (Tenant) (cont.)
Duties of the Lessee (Tenant) (cont.)

Access to the rental unit

The lessor is allowed access as follows:

    Anytime in an emergency situation
    Between 9 a.m. and 6 p.m. for periodic maintenance as stated in the rental agreement
    Between 8 a.m. and 8 p.m. to provide services requested by the tenant

Before entering the unit, the landlord must announce the intent to enter. Except in situations listed previously, the landlord must give the tenant at least 24 hours' notice of intent to enter and may only enter at reasonable times.


