A broker can agree to act as an agent for the buyer only.

The buyer's agent has fiduciary responsibilities to the buyer, creating a position of trust and confidence. 

Duties of Loyalty, Integrity, and Honesty
Just as in a relationship with a seller, the buyer's agent owes the buyer undivided allegiance and support.

Duty of Disclosure 
Buyer's agents must make full, fair, and timely disclosure to the buyer of all known facts relevant to the transaction, including
the willingness of a seller to accept a lower price;
any facts relating to the urgency of a seller's need to dispose of the property;
the length of time the property has been on the market and any other offers or counteroffers that have been made on the property;
all facts materially affecting the value or desirability of the property that are known, within the diligent attention and observations of the buyer's agent; and
any business or family relationship between the buyer's agent and the seller.

Duty of Obedience 
The buyer's agent must follow all lawful instructions of the buyer within the scope of the agent's authority.

Duty of Confidentiality 
The buyer's agent must keep confidential any information or facts about the buyer that could harm the buyer's bargaining position.

Duty of Reasonable Care
The buyer's agent is held to a standard of care that involves application of skill and expertise for the benefit of the buyer. The agent must be knowledgeable about the land, the title, and the physical characteristics of the property being purchased. The duty extends to rendering sound advice and counseling the buyer to obtain expert assistance when appropriate.

Duty of Accounting 
The buyer's agent must account for all monies entrusted to him and keep accurate and complete records of all monies.
As with the duty of accounting that is owed by the seller's agent, the buyer's agent should have an escrow account for the sole purpose of holding any funds entrusted to him by the buyer. State law may dictate the type of account and depository institution to be utilized.
As a practical matter, the buyer's earnest money deposit probably will be payable to and held by the seller's agent when a contract is accepted, and then transferred to the escrow or closing agent prior to closing.
As with the seller's agent's duty of accounting, the buyer's agent must never commingle business or personal funds with client or customer funds. 

Responsibilities of a Buyer's agent to the Seller 
While the buyer's agent represents the buyer in the transaction, the agent also has a duty of honest and fair dealing and good faith to the seller.

