Seller Agency Exclusively 
When a company chooses to only represent sellers, all sellers are clients and all buyers are customers.

Advantages
Both the public and real estate licensees are familiar with this traditional method of conducting real estate transactions. 

Disadvantages
The agency may lose agents who want to represent buyers. 
The agency may lose buyers who want to be represented. 
There is a high risk potential for unintended undisclosed dual agency. 
Maximum liability exists for breach of subagents' fiduciary duties. 

Buyer Agency Exclusively
When a company chooses to only represent buyers, all buyers are clients. Buyers do not list property.

Advantages
The legal risk is minimized.
There is no liability for subagents.
There is closer control over buyers.

Disadvantages
A buyer agency discourages agents who want to list.
Sellers do not contact buyer agencies and, thus, business is lost.

Single Agency Whether Listing or Selling 
In a single agency situation, the agent represents either the buyer or seller, but never both, in the same transaction.

Advantages 
There is no risk of undisclosed dual agency.

Disadvantages 
A single agency, whether listing or selling, is difficult to manage and only works in very small firms.

In-House Sales 
State law will determine whether an in-house representation of both parties to a transaction must be treated as a dual agency or whether it can be treated as a single agency with designated representation by two different licensees, even though both are employed by the same broker. Company policy may accept or reject either alternative, as permitted by state law.
In an in-house dual agency, one sales associate works with a seller-client while another sales associate works with a buyer-client, with full disclosure of the dual agency to the clients and acceptance of the relationship by them. A situation in which the listing agent is selling her own listing to a buyer-client should be avoided.
In an in-house dual agency, one sales associate works with a seller-client while another sales associate works with a buyer-client, with full disclosure of the dual agency to the clients and acceptance of the relationship by them. A situation in which the listing agent is selling her own listing to a buyer-client should be avoided.In an in-house dual agency, one sales associate works with a seller-client while another sales associate works with a buyer-client, with full disclosure of the dual agency to the clients and acceptance of the relationship by them. A situation in which the listing agent is selling her own listing to a buyer-client should be avoided.In an in-house dual agency, one sales associate works with a seller-client while another sales associate works with a buyer-client, with full disclosure of the dual agency to the clients and acceptance of the relationship by them. A situation in which the listing agent is selling her own listing to a buyer-client should be avoided.


