The fiduciary responsibilities of the seller's agent to the seller are created by the agent's position of trust and confidence.

Specific Fiduciary Responsibilities to the Seller (cont.)

Duty of Loyalty
The seller's agent owes the seller—the principal—total undivided allegiance.

A broker representing the seller who induces a buyer to believe that a property can be purchased for less than the asking price may fail to discharge the duty of loyalty to the seller and, therefore, forfeits the commission, as in  Beckwith v. Clevenger Realty Co., 360 P2d 596 (AZ 1961)

Duty of Disclosure 
The seller's agent must make full, fair, and timely disclosure to the principal of all known facts relevant to the transaction, including

at time of listing, the fact that subagency is optional and that the seller is responsible for the subagent's acts and representations;
the identity of all potential buyers;
information about the willingness of a buyer to complete the sale or offer a higher price;
the buyer's intention to subdivide or resell the property at a profit; and
any business or family relationship between the agent and the buyer.

Duty of Obedience 
The seller's agent must follow all lawful instructions from the seller within the scope of the agent's authority. In Abboud v. State Real Estate Commission , 316 N.W.2d 608 (NE 1982), a broker was held to have breached the fiduciary duty of obedience by failing to obey the seller's instruction to revoke a counteroffer prior to the buyer's acceptance.

Duty of Confidentiality
The seller's agent must keep confidential any information or facts about the principal that could harm the principal's bargaining position.

Duty of Reasonable care 
The seller's agent is held to a standard of care that involves applying skill and expertise to the benefit of the principal. The agent must be knowledgeable about the land, the title, and the physical characteristics of the property being sold. The duty extends to rendering sound advice and counseling the principal to obtain expert assistance when appropriate.

Duty of Accounting 
The seller's agent must account for all monies entrusted to her and keep accurate and complete records of all monies.
An escrow account must be established by a real estate broker for the sole purpose of holding client and customer funds. State law may dictate the type of account that is required, as well as the type of depository institution in which the account can be created. The broker should identify every deposit and withdrawal by a specific transaction name or number.
In every state, the broker is prohibited from commingling the broker's own business or personal funds with those that are held on behalf of clients or customers. The only exception would be for the amount needed to cover any fees charged by the depository institution for account maintenance.

////////////////////////////////
Subagency
In most states, traditional multiple listing service (MLS) policy was a blanket unilateral offer of subagency, making any MLS member automatically a subagent of the seller unless subagency was specifically rejected.
A subagent would act as the agent for the seller and have the affirmative obligations stated above.
Subagency has now been replaced by the concept of separate representation of seller and buyer, or even a form of nonagency, clarified by written disclosure of the type of agency relationship and written consent by the client or customer. 

Responsibilites of a Seller's agent
Although the seller's agent represents the seller in the transaction, the seller's agent also has responsibilities in dealing with buyers, including the duties of
diligent exercise of reasonable skill and care in the performance of the agent's duties on behalf of the seller; 
honest and fair dealing and good faith; 
presentation of all offers to the seller; 
disclosure of all facts known to the agent materially affecting the value or desirability of the property that are not known to, and within the diligent attention and observation of, the parties (including disclosure of material facts the broker knew or should have known); and 
verification of critical information received from the seller. 


