Industrial Property
The classification of industrial real estate is very broad and includes most of the properties we think of as manufacturing, storage, and distribution facilities. Because of the highly specialized nature of industrial property, it is often purchased by someone who will be a user of the facility, rather than for lease to a tenant. On the other hand, some manufacturers would prefer not to tie up their assets and would rather lease their industrial facilities from outside investors. In any case, an investor will have to assess the merits of each potential industrial facility investment individually, based on the property's intended use (and perhaps its adaptability to other uses as well).

Evaluation of Industrial Property
Industrial properties need to be evaluated based on many of the same factors that influence an investment decision in any other type of property. There are, however, a number of features that are unique to the investment decision when it involves industrial properties.

Structure
Is the building structurally suitable for the investor's needs? A general-purpose industrial property offers virtually limitless uses (a big-box warehouse structure, for instance, might be used for storage or distribution or adapted for any one of a variety of manufacturing applications). A single-purpose building, on the other hand, will be of limited usefulness, such as a lumber or steel mill. Finally, a special-purpose property has certain built-in features that limit its universal appeal even further, but it can still be used for a number of purposes (e.g., a property may have huge ovens that make it suitable only within the broad bakery category).

Other structural considerations include the foundation and floor load capacity:

Is the facility structurally sound?
Is there adequate space for the intended use?
What is the type and quality of the construction?
What is the age and condition of the building?
Is there adequate open space, or are there many columns and other support elements that may interfere with a planned use?

Adequacy of Utility Service and Mechanical Systems
Some questions to consider include:

Is there sufficient heating and cooling, air ventilation, and light?
Is the electrical service adequate for the intended purposes?
Are utility vendors relied on for service, or does the facility have or require its own generating system?

Loading Docks, Shipping, and Receiving Areas
The specific needs of industrial property tenants vary greatly. While some tenants will require loading docks and/or rail spurs for product and material delivery, all will have the following general considerations:

Is there adequate access to the site for trucks and cars?
Are loading facilities convenient and efficient, or do they create bottlenecks?
Is the site convenient to roads, railways, and air transportation facilities?

Environmental Assessment
A particular concern with existing industrial properties is the presence of toxic waste and the necessity of performing clean-up operations. If the intended use will create hazardous by-products, what are the storage and disposal systems? One of the biggest dilemmas facing landlords and tenants alike in this type of property is the liability created by an ever-increasing list of materials considered hazardous and the regulations regarding discharge and handling of these materials. Any agreement must be careful to address these liabilities and potential liabilities. An attorney should be consulted regarding the impact of state and federal environmental regulations on the property's value.

Community Support or Opposition
While an intended industrial use may be permissible by local zoning laws, the investor needs to consider whether or not the project has the support of the community. An investment in industrial property can become a nightmare if the community is uncooperative or hostile. On the other hand, many communities offer attractive financial incentives to investors to attract jobs and tax revenue.

