Office Property
Acquisition of an office use property is probably the first real departure from the residential real estate practitioner's everyday knowledge. This type of property is highly specialized, and tenants have some very specific needs in this kind of space.

Types of Office Property
Just as there are different types of residential property, there are many different kinds of office properties:

Low-rise office buildings. Generally under three stories, these include both suburban office campuses (or office parks) and downtown storefront buildings (with office space located on the floors above retail operations). Typical tenants include both small and large businesses, from lawyers and accountants to software developers and other high-tech firms. Tenants who rely on walk-in customers frequently prefer smaller office buildings.
Medical offices. Medical facilities, such as clinics and doctors' offices, often have specialized space, electrical, and other structural needs. Medical office buildings are designed to accommodate these requirements.
High-rise office buildings. It was once true that skyscrapers were found only in the downtown areas of large cities. Today, however, tall office buildings are found even in the farthest outlying suburbs, as downtown space becomes increasingly expensive. Some high-rise buildings are built for speculation; others are commissioned by a large company, with plans to occupy several floors and lease the remaining space to other tenants; still others are occupied entirely by a single company.
The value of office properties is usually arrived at by using generally accepted methods of valuing an investment. The conditions that affect the ability to produce income are very important and must be understood. Some of the considerations that real estate practitioners need to be aware of in the acquisition of this type of investment include the following:

Location. Is the building convenient for its tenants and their customers? Is it located in an attractive area?
Accessibility. Is the building in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act? On a larger scale, is there adequate transportation access, such as highways and public transportation?
Local sign ordinances and visibility. Can the building be seen from streets and sidewalks? Do local ordinances permit the main or anchor tenant to be adequately identified on the building or free-standing signage?
Appearance and market appeal. Is the building visually appealing? A sleek, modern office building will attract one kind of tenant; a distinctive historical landmark will attract others.
Adequacy of parking. This is especially an issue in downtown office buildings, where parking is often scarce. Suburban locations and campus-style office parks usually have sufficient parking for both tenants and customers. Consideration must be given to ADA and building code requirements for handicap parking and accessibility.
General market conditions. What are the prevailing rents per square foot in the area? Is there a growing or declining demand for office space? Often, investors need to rely on educated guesswork to anticipate future developments that will affect the office market, such as new airports, major relocations, and demographic shifts.
Common areas and facilities. Tenants in office buildings are often very conscious of the impression made on their customers by the building's lobby, hallways, and other amenities. Investors need to keep these important appearance issues in mind.
Tenant profiles. What kind of tenants will best suit the building? What businesses would the investor prefer not be present? Which businesses and professions might best complement each other?
Structure and ease of tenant improvements. New tenants frequently want to have existing space altered to more effectively meet their needs. How easy and inexpensive are such improvements in a particular building? For instance, an office building that was built at the end of the 19th century might have solid bearing walls three feet to five feet thick, while a more modern building may have been designed for easy alteration.
Type and adequacy of mechanical systems. Obviously, tenants want to be cool in the summer and warm in the winter. They want cold water in drinking fountains and functional restrooms. They want fresh air and adequate ventilation, computers that work, and lights that don't flicker. A building that cannot promise these basic amenities may not be a good investment. An investor also needs to know if the building has special maintenance requirements or systems that are expensive to operate.
Security. An office building needs to be able to ensure its tenants' safety. Both electronic and human security services are available, and bright lighting of common areas and parking lots is a necessity.
Staffing and management. An office building does not run itself. An investor needs to consider the cost (both in salaries and personnel expenses) of janitorial services, property managers, concierges, and others.
Rental rates for office property are usually quoted in terms of dollars per square foot annually. Often in addition to the base rent, the office tenant may be responsible for the payment of janitorial or other services on a pro rata basis. In office property, the lease will often require a calculation based on net leasable square footage or area. This calculation will distinguish between common areas and actual area in the office suite. There are several standards for calculating net leasable area (NLA); the most common is the Building Owner and Managers Association (BOMA) standard. Net leasable area is the amount of floor area upon which the rent is based. This typically excludes a portion of hallways and common use areas. Gross leasable area is typically the total square footage of the property.

Tenants in office property are demanding. This should not surprise anyone, as they are very concerned with the image of their business, and their office is a very large part of that image. Needless to say, in a multitenant office, special attention must be paid to tenant compatibility. Such things as the parking requirements and business hours of the different tenants must be carefully considered so they do not cause a conflict. In creating a rental or lease agreement for this type of property, it is certainly advisable to consult with an attorney.

Some of the particular concerns to be addressed include:

Amount and due date of rents. Not only should the lease address when and where the rent will be paid, but how will any rent increases be calculated and when exactly will these take effect. In some cases, leases call for set increases in rent, and in other cases the rent increase will be tied to an index such as the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
Length of occupancy. In most cases, office tenants will be desirous of a long-term lease rather than a month-to-month arrangement. When negotiating a long-term lease, one must consider many factors. The threat of inflation, occupancy arrangements during long-term maintenance, and changing business environments are just a few of these considerations.
Responsibility for insurance. Office leases must address which party is responsible for liability insurance as well as fire and extended coverage (all risk policy). In most cases the landlord will not be responsible for insurance covering the tenant's property within the structure.
Use of the premises. The lease should limit the use of the premises to office uses only. In addition, some uses will have noise and other considerations when there are multiple tenants.
Insolvency. Consideration should be given to the possibility of insolvency of either the landlord or tenant and how it will affect the lease. A tenant in bankruptcy can dramatically affect the cash flow and/or operation of the property. Insolvency of the landlord can affect the tenants' day-to-day business operations.
Use of common areas. One of the most common issues today in multitenant property is the location of a smoking area. This should be located away from entrances and consideration must be given to keeping the area clean and safe. Other common area considerations include safety and visual appeal.
Expenses, common area maintenance (CAM), and expense pass-throughs. Will the tenants be responsible for common area maintenance in addition to the base rent? Other points to address are the types of expenses that will be included, how these expenses will be billed, and a due date for when the charges are to be paid. Most often these expenses are prorated based on occupied square footage.
Sign requirements. The municipality will probably have an ordinance regarding signage but, in addition, the owner or landlord must consider aesthetics and tenant needs. In larger buildings a directory of tenants near the entrance is standard. Some tenants will desire outside signage and, when leasing a large portion of the property or signing a long-term lease, the tenant may want exclusive rights to "naming" the building.
Rights in the event of breach. This is a major topic of concern for both parties. If there should be a breach by the tenant, be sure to outline the landlord's requirement for storage of property, security, and access to vital business records.
Legal use requirements. The lease should address not only that the tenant use the property in a lawful manner, but the possible effect on the parties if a use were to become illegal as a result of a change in law.
Janitorial services and trash removal. Consider who will be responsible for the payment for janitorial services. How will access be provided and what will be the frequency of these services?
Service of notice. Both parties to the lease will need to provide notices for any number of reasons. The lease should indicate how notices are to be given, as well as where these notices should be delivered or sent. Will mail be considered proper, and on what date would a notice be considered given if mailed (the date sent or received)?
Destruction or curtailment of services. Office leases should address the parties' responsibilities in the event of an unforeseen tragedy. Often a lease will contain a "force majeure" or "act of God" clause that will clarify these responsibilities.

