At some point in their career, most agents will have the opportunity to market some type of a residential investment. Since these are the most common type of marketing opportunities that practitioners will encounter, it is important to be familiar with the following three basic residential investments:

Single-family homes
Small apartment properties (one to four units)
Large multifamily properties (more than four units)

Residential Investment General Considerations
An investor who is interested in purchasing single-family investment property will be concerned with a number of issues. These concerns generally fall into the following four basic categories:

Location
Physical condition
Income potential
Legal issues
The first category, location, includes such considerations as the property's actual physical placement in a community. As with any property, the investment's location has an effect on its value—the more desirable the property's location, the more it will cost as an investment (but also the greater its income potential).

Some factors that may influence the value of a property's location include the quality of the school district in which it is located and its proximity to public transportation, shopping, or other amenities.

The location's impact on a property's value is partly a result of market forces and partly a subjective determination. For example, one individual may find a particular neighborhood to be noisy and congested, while another may consider the same neighborhood an exciting urban environment. One person's dull and boring community may be another's pleasant, quiet neighborhood. In general, people are willing to pay a premium for a desirable location. It's no different in the real estate investment market.

The second category, physical condition, focuses on how much the investor will have to spend in order to make the property attractive and livable, and to maintain it in that condition. It includes such factors as the property's overall condition, maintenance requirements, and safety considerations that affect the owner's liability, such as fire hazards or potentially dangerous conditions.

The third category, income potential, is primarily concerned with the property's resale probabilities and the rental market. Obviously, the first two categories are also considerations here: the property's location and condition will dictate in large part both its resale value and the amount of rent that it will command.

Finally, the investor must consider legal issues, such as landlord-tenant laws, that may affect his or her investment. Some laws dictate the amount of security deposit that a landlord may require, for instance, as well as how the deposit is to be held, what (if any) interest must be paid to the tenant, and how and when the deposit may be spent. Such factors have a very real impact on a landlord's cash flow.

Leasing Residential Investments
Before we examine the specific provisions in a residential lease, it might be useful to quickly review some basics about leases. Whenever an investor plans to rent or lease property to a tenant, there should be a formal written agreement prior to occupancy. While there are standard leases available, an investor might consider having a specific lease prepared by an attorney. Such a lease could address an investor's particular areas of concern.

Remember that a lease is a form of contract. To be valid, a lease must meet essentially the same requirements as any other contract:

Offer and acceptance. The parties must reach a mutual agreement on all terms of the contract.
Consideration. All leases must be supported by valid consideration. Rent is the normal consideration given for the right to occupy the leased premises. However, the payment of rent is not essential as long as consideration was granted in creation of the lease itself.
Capacity to contract. The parties must have the legal capacity to enter into a contract, as determined by state law. For instance, they must be of legal age and sound mind.
Legal objectives. The objectives of the lease must be legal, such as renting residential property for residential purposes.
The leased premises should be clearly described. If the lease is for a part of a building, such as an apartment or office suite, the space itself or the apartment designation should be described specifically. If supplemental space is to be included, such as a parking lot or storage area, the lease should clearly identify it.

There are a number of considerations and clauses that should be included in any lease or rental agreement, and they fall into three general categories:

Basic provisions
Legal issues
Responsibilities of the parties
The first category, basic provisions, includes such essentials as the amount and due date of the rental payments, the length of the tenancy, and the number of occupants allowed in the unit. The amount of the required security deposit should be stated, along with a description of how the deposit will be held during the lease term and how it will be used upon termination of the lease. Whether pets are permitted on the premises should also be addressed, and alternate contacts for both tenant and landlord should be provided.

The second category, legal issues, includes information regarding the landlord's right of entry, the legal uses to which the property may be put, and the rights of the parties in the event of a breach and a severability clause. A severability clause permits any part of the lease that is found to be illegal to be severed from the contract without invalidating the remaining terms. A nondiscrimination statement should be included as well.

Finally, the lease should describe the rights and responsibilities of the parties. Who is liable for which repairs? Who is responsible for obtaining insurance? What happens if the premises are sold, destroyed, or condemned? While some of these issues may never arise during the course of most rental relationships, there should nonetheless be a provision for them in the lease.

Most disputes between landlords and tenants occur because of inadequate communication or lack of a clear understanding of the obligations of each. Spelling out the parties' duties and expectations in the lease helps avoid misunderstandings and conflicts.

Each of the different types of residential property has different requirements that should be included in a lease. Most residential leases are gross leases, with the tenant responsible for rental and utility payments, and the landlord responsible for taxes, insurance, and maintenance.

Single-Family Homes
Many investors own one or more single-family residences for investment. When asked, most of investors will tell you that they prefer single-family investments to other investments because of the comparatively small management requirements. Additionally, the market for single-family rental homes is stable and their investment is fairly liquid. While the above statements may or may not be correct, they are at best highly subjective. It is for this reason that the market value of single-family investment property tends to be most influenced by general market conditions instead of the generally accepted methods of determining investment values.

A disadvantage to single-family residential rental properties as an investment is that the income generated is usually only sufficient to cover the investor's break-even point. That is, the rent will pay the investor's mortgage, taxes, and insurance costs, but it will not be a terrific source of profit. Further, that limited income potential can be easily negated by any significant vacancy period. Finally, unless the investor holds a large number of properties, a personal relationship can develop with tenants that, while pleasant, may create difficulties if a hard line needs to be taken later.

Small Apartment Property
An investment in a small apartment property, from two to four units, is affordable and attractive to a fairly large group of investors in the marketplace. Investors in these types of property are likely to have purchased for the same reasons as investors in single-family property. One of the reasons that many investors are drawn to this type of property is that the risk of a full vacancy is somewhat diminished when compared to single-family units.

There are of course a number of additional considerations involved in the selection of this type of property:

Adequacy of parking areas. Tenants will be attracted to properties that provide sufficient parking, and are often willing to pay higher rent for the convenience. Most families today have two automobiles or other recreational vehicles requiring space.
Utility metering. How will water, gas, heat, air-conditioning, and electricity be billed to tenants? If the owner is responsible for utility costs, this can be a major investment consideration due to the increased operating costs.
Maintenance of common areas. What expenses will be involved in maintaining any lobby areas, hallways, laundry, and storage rooms as well as parking facilities and grounds? Pleasant and clean common areas are attractive for tenants, but may be expensive to maintain.
Sound-proofing between units. Common tenant issues are privacy and quiet; thus higher rent can be commanded if a unit is acceptably sound-proofed. However, the investor must determine at what point sound-proofing becomes so expensive that reasonable rent cannot recover the cost.
Fire, safety, sanitation, and accessibility laws. Compliance with local, state, and federal law is not optional, but compliance may involve costs that need to be taken into consideration prior to making an investment decision.
Environmental issues and hazardous materials. A variety of federal, state, and local environmental regulations will determine the extent of the investor's environmental responsibilities. The property may contain asbestos, radon, lead pipes, or lead-based paint that needs to be removed or sealed off. The property may have been built on a landfill or there may be leaking underground storage tanks. Abatement of these environmental hazards can be expensive, but investors have little choice but to comply if they want to open a property to rent-paying residents. The owner may want to provide recycling facilities for tenants even if he or she is not required by law to do so.
Whenever there is more than one tenant involved, the landlord must recognize that there are additional considerations at every turn. While disputes with a single tenant in a single-unit property may be resolved (amicably or otherwise) on a more or less individual, face-to-face basis, the complications increase exponentially with each additional tenant. When drafting agreements for occupancy in multiunit properties, these more personal considerations need to be standardized and included in the lease:

Resolution of tenant disputes
Assignment of parking areas
Application of fair housing law
Rules and regulations regarding tenant conduct and use of common areas
Owner or manager's right of access to each unit for routine maintenance
Compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements for accessibility and tenant modification of the premises

Large Multifamily Property
The larger the property, the broader the considerations in the rental agreement. Areas of greater importance are tenant relations and provision of services. There are also a number of considerations regarding tenant disputes and interactions. A complete set of written rules should be in place to eliminate as many problems as possible. Some additional special considerations are:

use and security of common areas;
curfews and noise;
tenants' right to additional services;
enforcement of parking space assignments, and policies regarding inoperative vehicles, long-term storage, and guest parking;
policy on exterior furnishings and storage (on patios and balconies, for instance);
destruction or curtailment of services; and
tenant associations.
As the number of units involved in apartment properties increases, so does the complexity of analysis. The basic principles do not change, but many additional criteria are considered in the selection of a particular property. Many times the analysis will include considerations of the local, state, and regional economies, perhaps even national trends. Investors in this type of property are often very sophisticated and adept at the acquisition and management of these properties. While it is beyond the scope of this text to discuss all of the complexities of a large property acquisition, some of the basic considerations include:

Major emphasis on general market conditions and rent levels. What is the supply of rental space as compared to demand? Are rents increasing in the area, or are there reasons that demand is weak? This consideration includes a look at interest rates, rates of home ownership, and community demographics.
Overall condition of the property. Will the property require additional maintenance due to condition? Since more maintenance will affect cash flow, can rehabilitation reduce ongoing maintenance expenses? Is a rehabilitation campaign cost-effective and will it improve either occupancy or income levels?
Amenities available to tenants. Many residential properties today offer a wide range of tenant services. Cable TV, Internet services, concierge services, and many others may be desirable. Swimming pools and fitness centers are also popular with today's tenant.
Tenant services. Will the property provide centralized services such as coin-operated laundry or vending machines? When these types of services are offered, there is a major concern as to maintenance expense and adequate capacity of these services. When these services are coin operated, then there are security and maintenance issues as well.
Adequacy of mechanical systems. Many of the existing residential investment properties in the market today were built many years ago. In today's society, tenant demands on electrical systems are far greater than in the past. Inadequate electrical service cannot only cause a problem attracting tenants but can be a fire danger.
Management and staffing requirements. In larger residential developments, an on-site manager and on-site maintenance personnel are required. If there is no one on site, then careful consideration must be made for after hours and emergency situation responses.
Federal Fair Housing Act. Residential property is subject to the federal Fair Housing Act. All advertising and leasing must be in compliance with not only the federal law, but any local ordinances as well. A written tenant selection policy and equal treatment of all tenants is a must.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). While the ADA does not apply to residential units, in many larger properties there will be common areas and rental offices that must comply with ADA accessibility standards. The cost of compliance must be measured in any financial analysis.
Adequacy of parking areas. There is a constant struggle between building codes and societal change. Most families will have at least two cars, so a careful study must be done about type of unit (one or two bedrooms) and parking requirements. Covered parking is very desirable in many areas.
Security of common areas. Are the common areas adequately lit and secure? Some properties are gated and fenced, with only tenants having keyed access. When the property is secured, an intercom or other communication system for visitors is required.
Compliance with local housing codes. Residential landlords are required to comply with local housing codes affecting health and safety. Smoke alarms, fire extinguishers, and safety plans are required to eliminate potential liability for the owner and property manager.
Rent control laws. Some communities may have in place rent control or affordable housing laws that will dramatically affect the financial performance of multifamily property. These types of limitations will require additional analysis and consideration prior to investment.
External influences on property. There can be many external influences on a residential investment, some positive and some negative. Many of these influences will impact the financial investment decision, and others will affect the ability to attract and maintain quality tenants. External influences could include a change in neighborhood uses, gentrification, or adjacent/ nearby development or redevelopment that will influence desirability.

