Retail Property
Retail properties are diverse and unique when compared to all other types of real estate investments. An investor in this type of property will be confronted with a wide variety of property types, ranging from small free-standing single-tenant properties to strip shopping centers to regional shopping malls. Each type of property has its own inherent benefits as well as potential problems.

In the retail market, the ability of the property to produce an acceptable income stream will depend on a number of factors unique to retailing. The acquisition of such an investment requires many of the same considerations from the investor as it does from the retail tenant.


Types of Retail Property
Free standing. Free-standing retail property can range from a small retail operation to a "big box" retailer. These properties are often user owned or under long-term triple net lease by the occupant.
Neighborhood strip center. These centers can vary in size from as little as ten thousand square feet to several hundred thousand square feet. A vital part of many communities, these centers usually have a mix of tenants. Many have an anchor tenant such as a grocery store to help bring traffic for the smaller tenants.
Regional malls. Malls are currently undergoing a major shift in marketing and utility. Once the mainstay of major retailers, these properties are struggling to adapt to the competition of smaller "specialty retail" centers.
Specialty retail centers. This category of retail property contains many subtypes. Outlet malls have become very popular in large metropolitan areas. Warehouse shopping and club shopping have become a part of nearly every consumer's shopping habits.
Retail properties need to be evaluated based on many of the same factors that influence an investment decision for offices. Some of the considerations that real estate practitioners need to be aware of in the acquisition of this type of investment are:

Location
Accessibility
Local sign ordinances and visibility
Appearance and market appeal
Adequacy of parking
General market conditions
Common areas and facilities
Tenant profiles
Structure and ease of tenant improvements
Type and adequacy of mechanical systems
Security
Staffing and management
Hours of operation—many retail centers and malls will require minimum hours of operation. There may be a merchants' association to promote the tenants' interests and organize advertising and sales promotions
Tenants for retail property are very diverse, depending upon their product. Some, such as specialty retailers, like free-standing locations. Many others prefer to be near or adjacent to other retailers, hoping to trade on the other merchants' foot traffic. Special considerations will often be made for a strong anchor tenant in an attempt to attract particular types of neighboring businesses or clientele. In many larger retail centers, the merchants will band together in a merchants' association to do mutually beneficial advertising and promotion.

Since the demands of the retail tenant are so highly specialized, it is important to consider all aspects when creating occupancy agreements. Special considerations for the possibility that a disruption of services may substantially impact a tenant and numerous other items are unique to retail properties.


