Agency is best understood when it is put in the historical context of the evolution of the real estate profession. The real estate business actually began on Wall Street in New York City in the early 1800s. Wall Street was already a financial trading center that involved all types of commodities. Because houses were just another type of commodity, individuals began maintaining lists of properties that were available to buy. Sellers would establish an ask price and the first brokers would locate buyers who would establish a bid. The difference between the ask and the bid was retained by the brokers as their commission.

Initially, all representation was focused on sellers. There was little professionalism, no structured licensing system and consumers were often victims of real estate scams and schemes. As real estate offices began to be formed in the mid 1850s, there still was a lack of professionalism and standards for the real estate industry. Licensing boards and commissions would not be created for another 50 years.

In the early 1900s, the National Association of Real Estate Exchanges (the parent organization of what would later become the National Association of REALTORS) was formed to set standards of professionalism for the real estate industry. The centerpiece of that effort would be the drafting of the first REALTOR Code of Ethics which professed fiduciary duties that would be owed to clients represented by real estate professionals. Nonetheless, all such obligations and duties were owed only to sellers. Buyers were left in a caveat emptor (let the buyer beware) world of non-representation.

It was the seismic event in 1995 created by a class action lawsuit against Edina Realty that stunned the world of real estate. The lawsuit resulted in the payout of nearly $20 million to buyers who had worked with the firm, and yet lacked any real disclosure about the nature of representation or the rights to which they were entitled. The Edina lawsuit changed representation in real estate transactions. State by state, regulators began to recognize the rights of buyers and provided access to representation. Today, we operate in a world that requires full disclosure of agency relationships to consumers and with it offer a wide variety and array of various types of legal representation that real estate professionals must understand and apply every day.

