Real estate professionals owe statutory duties to clients. These duties are the highest legal duties that the law imposes upon anyone. The duties of the agent include obedience to lawful instructions, loyalty, and disclosure of relevant and material facts. The agent also provides the client a full measure of confidentiality now and forever, accounting for monies and paperwork, and the reasonable care and diligence of a licensed, competent professional working in a regulated industry. An agent can advise a client, can become the advocate for the client in negotiations, and should work in the client's best interest at all times.

To summarize the duties of the agent:

Obedience
: A real estate professional has a duty and obligation to follow the directions of the client, unless those directions violate the law. Clients are the principals, and as the agent, we act at their direction.

Loyalty:
 The real estate professional is expected to place the client's interest above all else. The duty of loyalty also imposes an obligation of confidentiality regarding the client's motivations, personal finances, and circumstances.

Disclosure:
 A real estate professional owes duties of disclosure beyond the duties that the parties to a real estate transaction owe to each other. Regardless of disclosure by and between the parties, real estate agents owe a duty to disclose all material facts of which they know or should have known.

Confidentiality:
 An agent is bound to keep a client's confidences during and following the transaction.

Accountability:
 Real estate professionals owe their principals a duty of accountability regarding the handling of all funds and monies rightfully belonging to the client. This obligation includes the duty to accurately account for all funds handled in the transaction.

Reasonable Skill and Care:
 Real estate professionals are held to the standards of their industry, and must act as a reasonably prudent and skillful real estate professional would act under similar circumstances.

Following the termination or completion of the agency relationship, the agent continues to owe clients two duties:
Accounting:
 Licensees are responsible for accounting for all funds as well as for any property for which they are responsible, such as access to the property (i.e., keys, alarm codes, etc.).

 Confidentiality:
  Licensees are required to preserve confidential information provided by the client during the course of and following the agency relationship that might have a negative impact on the clients' real estate activity, unless the client to whom the confidential information pertains grants consent to disclose the information, or disclosure is required by law, or disclosure is necessary to defend the licensee against an accusation of wrongful conduct in a proceeding before the commission or before a professional association or professional standards committee.

It is critical for real estate professionals to maintain the distinction between clients and customers. Fiduciary duties are only imposed in relationships with clients. It is often said that real estate professionals work for clients and work with customers. These are the obligations that are set forth in SC Code of Laws §40-57-350.
The duties that real estate licensees owe consumers in South Carolina vary dramatically, whether dealing with clients or customers. Licensees must be able to distinguish the nature of their relationships and the obligations that they owe to parties in the transaction based on their relationship. This issue is often a problem due to lack of application, not lack of information.
The general principles of agency and real estate law draw a distinction between clients and customers. Clients are those who are in a written, defined agency relationship with the real estate brokerage. Customers are members of the public, or those not represented by the agent in a particular real estate transaction. Real estate licensees owe legal obligations to both.
The fiduciary duties only apply to clients, those people whom real estate professionals represent. Those unrepresented individuals in a real estate transaction as well as those represented by another brokerage are considered customers. The word "customer" is misleading, since it dates back to when agents represented sellers and buyers were the third-party unrepresented parties. Today, the agent may be representing the buyer, and thus the unrepresented third-party is the seller. Consequently, it is helpful to use the term," unrepresented party."
The duties afforded unrepresented parties are much less than the fiduciary duties owed to clients.

Duties to customers (third-parties) include the following:
Present all offers in a timely manner
Account for money or other property received on your behalf
Provide an explanation of the scope of services to be provided
Be fair and honest and provide accurate information
Provide limited confidentiality to customers
Disclose material facts about the property or the transaction
